DIRECTIVE 12/24 — Special Leave (supersedes 05/17)
Minister for Industrial Relations Directive. Effective 30 September 2024.

NOTE ON THIS EXTRACTION: page 1 of the source PDF is flattened and its text
does not extract. Clauses 3-4 below were transcribed from the rendered page.
Everything after "5. Entitlement" is extracted directly. The .pdf is authoritative.

3. Legislative authority
3.1 Section 223 of the Public Sector Act 2022.
3.2 Section 228 of the Public Sector Act 2022 (public sector employees employed
    under establishing legislation).
3.3 Section 229 of the Public Sector Act 2022.

4. Application
4.1 This directive applies to (subject to an award, certified agreement...):
    (a) public service employees; or
    (b) public sector employees employed under the establishing legislation of the
        following entities:
        (i) Queensland Health; (ii) Hospital and Health Services;
        (iii) Queensland Building Construction Commission;
        (iv) Queensland Building Construction Commission Employing Office;
        (v) Queensland Fire and Emergency Services (other than auxiliary fire officers);
        (vi) Residential Tenancies Authority; (vii) Residential Tenancies Employing Office;
        (viii) Trade and Investment Queensland; or
        (ix) Office of the Queensland Integrity Commissioner.
4.2 This directive does not apply to casual employees (except in relation to
    unpaid Bereavement Leave and unpaid Compassionate Leave).

--- extracted text follows (pages 2-12) ---

  
 
  
 
DIRECTIVE 12/24 
Supersedes: 05/17 
Minister for Industrial Relations Directive: 
Special Leave 
  
 
 
 
1
 For example, the establishing legislation of the Queensland Building and Construction Employing Office is the Queensland Building and Construction Commission Act 1991
.  
2
 
 casual employees (except in relation to unpaid Bereavement Leave and unpaid Compassionate Leave). 
  
Office of Industrial Relations 
Public Sector Industrial Relations 
 
 but does not include Queensland Ambulance Service employees appointed under the Ambulance Service Act 1991. 
 
5. Entitlement  5.1 An employee, as defined in this directive: 
(a) may be granted special leave either on full pay or without pay as provided for in clause 6; (b) must be granted special leave of absence either on full pay or without pay as provided and 
where indicated in Schedule One. 5.2 Unless otherwise indicated, leave entitlements apply to part-time employees on a pro-rata basis. 
5.3 Certain parts of this directive apply to public service officers only. Where this occurs, the word \221officer\222 will be used instead of \221employee\222.   
5.4 Leave prescribed in this directive may be converted to an hourly basis for the purpose of entitlement, granting and recording of leave. Leave is based on the number of hours that the 
employee would have worked. Schedule Three provides conversion formulas. 5.5 If an employee is rostered to work a specific number of hours on a day and the employee is absent 
from duty on that day, or part of it, the period of leave will be the number of hours that the employee was rostered to work on that day but did not work. This applies even though the period 
of leave may be different to the employee\222s daily hours (as defined). 5.6 Where a public holiday or substituted day under the Holidays Act 1983 occurs, during an absence 
on special leave without pay, employees are not entitled to be paid for the public holiday.  
6. Discretionary leave 6.1 A chief executive may approve paid leave for employees for any purpose, with duration 
appropriate to the purpose of the leave. (a) Leave approved under clause 6.1 must not exceed more than five (5) working days per year 
per reason unless the chief executive considers that circumstances warrant the granting of additional paid leave. Any additional leave must be reasonable and proportionate to the 
circumstances.  (b) Examples of reasons could include, but are not limited to, those specified in Schedule Two. 
6.2 A chief executive may approve unpaid leave for employees for any purpose and for any duration.  6.3 A chief executive may approve purchased leave, a form of unpaid leave, for any period determined 
by the chief executive in accordance with Queensland Government policy, guidelines and/or industrial instruments.  
6.4 A chief executive may approve a combination of paid and unpaid leave under this directive.  6.5 In determining an application for leave under clause 6.1 or clause 6.2, a chief executive must 
consider: (a) the reason the leave is requested; 
(b) the duration of the requested leave; (c) if applicable, for fixed term temporary employees, the duration of the person\222s employment 
(including end date); (d) the impact on the employee if the requested leave is not approved.  
 7. Taking leave 
7.1 Other than as provided for in Schedule One, leave is always to be subject to the demands of a particular situation and is to be taken at entity convenience. 
  
  
 Directive 12/24  Page 2 of 12
 
 
 
8. Recall from or cancellation of leave  8.1 Clause 8 does not apply to leave granted in accordance with Schedule One.  
8.2 A chief executive may, if entity circumstances require it: (a) recall an employee from special leave; or 
(b) cancel the approval or granting of any special leave; or  (c) defer the taking of that leave. 
 9. Definitions   
Except where otherwise defined, terms in this directive are consistent with their meanings in the Industrial Relations Act 2016 and/or the Public Sector Act 2022. 
Casual employee includes both long term casual employees and short term casual employees. Daily hours means:  
 the number of ordinary daily working hours of an employee as specified in the relevant industrial instrument; or 
 in any other case \226 the number of hours specified in the relevant industrial instrument as the average number of hours per working day of an employee during a pay period or other period 
that is reasonable in the circumstances. Employee means an employee to whom this directive applies.  
Full pay for the purpose of this directive means the employee\222s ordinary rate of pay and is inclusive of any fixed allowances that are part of the regular fortnightly pay, excluding shift 
penalties and consolidated shift allowance payments. Immediate family includes: 
 the employee\222s spouse; or  a child, ex-nuptial child, step-child, adopted child, ex-foster child of the employee or employees\222 
spouse; or  parent, grandparent, grandchild, sister or brother of the employee and of the employee\222s spouse 
(such as the employee\222s mother-in-law, father-in-law, grandparent-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law). 
The list of family members provided for in this definition is not exhaustive.   Entities have the discretion to grant bereavement leave to employees on the death of family 
members that are not expressly provided for in this definition. Cultural and personal reasons may be taken into consideration when an entity makes a decision. 
Industrial instrument for the purposes of this directive, except for clause 3 (Legislative Authority) and clause 4 (Application), means an award, certified agreement, contract, directive or 
determination made under section 180 of the Industrial Relations Act 2016. Officer means a public service officer, and has the meaning given to it under section 14 of the 
Public Sector Act 2022. 
 Directive 12/24  Page 3 of 12
 
 
 
SCHEDULE ONE \226 NON-DISCRETIONARY SPECIAL LEAVE 
Category  Entitlement  Conditions of Approval 
1. Election Leave     
An employee who contests a state or local  Total period not exceeding two (2)  Applies to employees. 
government election shall be granted leave for months. campaigning purposes. 
 Leave may be granted either as a charge against accrued 
recreation leave, long service leave or without salary. 
 
 
2. Local Government Leave     
An employee who has been elected to hold office as  Leave on Full Pay  Applies to employees. 
mayor, chair or member of a council is to be granted special leave for attendance at council meetings or for 
undertaking council business. 
  An employee who has been granted special leave on full pay to 
attend council meetings or business and who receives payment by the council for attending must submit the payment to the chief 
executive for reimbursement to entity funds.  
Except where the salary of the employee is less than the amount received for the time spent on council business, the employee is 
entitled to retain the difference between the salary and the amount paid by the council. 
 When determining the amount paid by council, expenses for travel 
and accommodation are not to be taken into account   Employee elected as mayor,  
Where an absence may cause disruption to transport or essential services, the granting of leave is subject to approval having regard 
to all the circumstances. These conditions do not apply to employees who are elected as 
full-time councillors, and who are paid a salary for holding such office. 
 commissioner or chair \226  
  
 Up to a maximum of five (5) 
working days per calendar year non-cumulative. 
 
 Employee elected to other 
positions \226 
 Up to a maximum of three (3) 
working days per calendar year non- cumulative. 
 Leave Without Salary
  
Additional leave as required.  
 
Directive 12/24 Page 4 of 12 
 
 
Category  Entitlement  Conditions of Approval 
3. Australian Volunteers International     
An officer who desires to undertake service overseas  Up to two (2) years without salary.  Applies to officers only. 
with the Australian Volunteers International shall be granted leave without salary. 
 The officer shall make arrangements regarding superannuation 
contributions in accordance with relevant legislation. 
4. Declared Emergency Situation or Disaster     
Situation 
An employee who has been directed to assist in an  Leave on full pay as required.  Applies to employees. 
emergency situation or a disaster situation in 
    
   Applies to employees. accordance with the Public Safety Preservation Act 
1986 or the Disaster Management Act 2003 shall be Unpaid leave, for a period that is Must advise the employer in writing and give the employer granted leave for this purpose. \223reasonable in the circumstances\224 sufficient evidence to satisfy a reasonable person that the 
pursuant to section 118(2) of the employee took the emergency service leave because the Industrial Relations Act 2016. employee was engaged in a voluntary emergency management 
activity.   
  
  
  
  
  
  
 Where an employee is not entitled to paid leave in an 
emergency situation or a disaster situation, they may still be entitled to unpaid \223emergency service leave\224 in 
accordance with the requirements of section 118 of the Industrial Relations Act 2016. 
 Directive 12/24  Page 5 of 12
 
 
 
Category  Entitlement  Conditions of Approval 
5. Defence Reserve Forces Leave     
An employee who is a member of the Reserve Forces  Leave on Full Pay  Applies to employees. 
is to be granted leave for \226 
  Up to a maximum of \226  
(a)    32 calendar days per financial year (Army Reserve, 
Naval Reserve and Air Reserve) 
plus an additional 14 calendar days per financial 
year during employee\222s first (a) attendance for reserve service, including   year of reserve service, 
where attending recruit/initial training. 
 Where possible, at least three (3) months notice prior to (b)  Up to a maximum of four (4) 
working days per financial year. 
 but not limited to; training, camps, field 
exercises, schools, classes or courses and/or deployment situations and may 
involve more than one (1) absence in a financial year 
commencement of leave should be provided. 
 
Evidence of the necessity for the employee\222s attendance and 
proposed length for reserve service in the form of a Training or 
 Deployment Notice must be submitted with the employee\222s  
  
 (b) travel from and to the employee\222s place of 
residence to attend continuous training OR 
application and, at the conclusion of the event, the employee must submit a certificate of attendance from the Commanding Officer. to participate in an advance or rear party in 
connection with a period of continuous training 
 Calendar days are inclusive of non-work days, weekend days and 
public holidays, meaning leave is debited based on the number of calendar days specified in the Training or Deployment Notice, not 
the number of days absent from work.   
Additional leave is subject to certification by the Commanding Officer that the additional days are required. 
 
Leave Without Salary 
Additional leave for training, deployment and travel as required 
Note: The Defence Reserve Service (Protection) Act 2001 at section 17 states that \223an employer must not hinder or prevent a 
person in the employer\222s employment from volunteering to render defence service or rendering defence service\224.  
   
When a 
requirement for an employee Reservist to undertake defence 
service (which includes training) causes serious difficulties for an entity, the entity should request the Australian Defence Service to 
identify alternative dates for the defence service. 
Employer Support Payments 
 Entities are expected to pursue Employer Support Payment entitlements from the Department of Defence when an employee accesses paid or unpaid Defence Reserve 
Forces Leave. Details of the financial benefits for employers of reservists provided under the Employer Support Payment Scheme can be obtained from the Defence Reserve Support Council on their website www.reserveemployersupport.gov.au
.  
 Directive 12/24  Page 6 of 12
 
 
 
Category  Entitlement  Conditions of Approval 
6. Bereavement Leave     
(a) An employee (other than a casual  (a) In relation to each deceased  Applies to employees (including casual employees, where 
employee) is entitled to bereavement leave person \226 two (2) days specified).  on full pay on the death of a member of the bereavement leave on full 
employee\222s immediate family or household pay. or if the employee, or the employee\222s 
spouse is pregnant and the pregnancy ends other than by the birth of a living 
child. The leave is to be granted for a death occurring either within Australia or 
overseas. 
 The employee (including a casual) is to furnish evidence of the 
death or funeral arrangements that are satisfactory to the chief executive. 
 
 
(b) A casual employee is entitled to  (b) In relation to each deceased  
bereavement leave on the death of a person \226 two (2) days unpaid member of the employee\222s immediate bereavement leave.  
family or household. The leave is to be granted for a death occurring either within 
Australia or overseas. 
 
(c) An employee (including a casual) may be  (c) As determined by the chief  
granted additional bereavement leave executive. without pay. 
(d) If an employee (including a casual)  (d) An amount of unpaid  
reasonably requires extra time to travel to bereavement leave equal to and from the funeral or other ceremony for the time reasonably required 
the death. for the travel. 
Note: Refer to clause 9 for the definition of \221immediate family\222. 
 Directive 12/24  Page 7 of 12
 
 
 
Category  Entitlement  Conditions of Approval 
7. Compassionate Leave   
(a) An employee (other than a casual (a) Two (2) days per occasion. Applies to employees (including casual employees, where employee) is entitled compassionate leave  specified).  
on full pay on each occasion when a   member of the employee\222s immediate  
family or household:   The employee (including a casual) must give the employer  sufficient evidence to satisfy a reasonable person that the  
 employee was taking compassionate leave because a member of  (i) contracts or develops a personal the employee\222s family or household\222s life was threatened by 
illness that poses a serious  personal illness or personal injury.  threat to the person\222s life; or 
(ii) sustains a personal injury that  poses a serious threat to the  
person\222s life. (b) Two (2) days unpaid per  
occasion. (b) A casual employee is entitled to unpaid  
compassionate leave on each occasion when a member of the employee\222s  
immediate family or household:   
(i) contracts or develops a personal  illness that poses a serious  
threat to the person\222s life; or (ii) sustains a personal injury that  
poses a serious threat to the  person\222s life. 
   
 
 Directive 12/24  Page 8 of 12
 
 
 
SCHEDULE TWO \226 DISCRETIONARY SPECIAL LEAVE 
Entitlement 
Up to five (5) working days paid leave per year per reason or such additional leave determined to be appropriate by the chief executive may be granted in accordance with clause 
6.1(a).  
Category 
1. Emergency or Compassionate Grounds 
An officer may be granted leave that is reasonably required either for an emergency situation or on compassionate grounds which fall outside the scope of \223Compassionate Leave\224, as defined in clause 7 of Schedule One. 
2. Sporting Competitions 
An officer may be granted leave for sporting competitions if they are selected as \226 (a) a competitor, team manager or team coach of a state or national team participating at a major national or international sporting competition; or  
(b) an umpire or referee at such competitions. The term \223competitor\224 includes reserve competitors. Single competitors selected in events such as the marathon would be included in the category of \223state or national team\224. 
An officer who is selected as a competitor or official at the Olympic Games, Commonwealth Games or International Games for the Disabled may be granted leave for the Games. 
3. Seminars, Conferences other than as an Official Representative 
An officer who is not an official representative and attends a seminar, conference, etc. within Australia or overseas may be granted leave for the event if \226 (a) the seminar, conference, etc. is associated with the officer's area of employment; and 
(b) the officer is a member of the society or association responsible for the event or contributes substantially to the event by way of delivery of a paper or some other way 
4. Returning Officers 
An officer appointed as a returning officer at a state election may be granted leave to discharge electoral duties. 
5. Floods, Cyclones, Bushfires, etc. 
An employee who is prevented from attending the employee's normal place of employment because of floods, cyclonic disturbances, severe storms or bushfires may be granted leave in the following circumstances \226 
(a) it is not practicable for the employee to attend for duty at another Government office; (b) the employee is absent from their usual place of residence on approved leave or during a weekend and is unable to return in sufficient time to attend the normal place 
of employment or it is not practicable to attend duty at another Government office; (c) where the employee is required to return home before the employee\222s usual ceasing time to ensure personal safety, the protection of the employee\222s family and 
property or the availability of transport facilities which may be disrupted or discontinued because of weather or environmental conditions; (d) where the employee must, of necessity, remain at home to safeguard the employee\222s family or property; 
 
Directive 12/24 Page 9 of 12 
 
 
(e) where the employee remains at home to have temporary repairs effected, restore belongings, clean up etc; 
(f) where the employee is travelling on transfer and is unavoidably delayed from arriving at the destination. (An officer may also be allowed reasonable expenses necessarily incurred for accommodation and meals for the officer and family.) 
Category 
6. Emergency Management Courses 
An employee who is selected to attend an emergency management course or seminar organised by the Australian Emergency Management Institute, Mt Macedon, Victoria or the State Emergency Service may be granted leave to attend the course or seminar. 
7. Attendance at Emergencies 
An employee who is a member of the State Emergency Service, voluntary member of a local fire fighting unit, member of a Rural Fire Brigade, auxiliary of a Fire Brigade, Honorary Ambulance Officer, St. John Ambulance volunteer or any other emergency service volunteer will be granted leave when called out for emergencies or to fight fires. 
8. Platelet etc Donors  
An employee who is selected as a donor for the apheresis procedure may be granted leave for this purpose. 
9. Blood Donors 
An employee who attends a recognised facility as a donor may be granted leave for the purpose of donating blood. 
10. Pre-Retirement Seminars 
An employee who attends a pre-retirement planning seminar may be granted leave to attend the seminar. 
11. Other Exceptional Circumstances 
This leave type may be used for many and varied circumstances and should be granted to assist employees particularly on compassionate grounds.  Applications of this nature must be handled confidentially and with sensitivity. Such circumstances may include but are not limited to the following examples: 
(a) an employee who is dealing with matters arising from or as a result of family or domestic violence; (b) an employee who is undergoing an intensive course of medical treatment from specialist practitioners; 
(c) an employee who is dealing with the terminal illness of a partner, child or other close family member (recognising kinship for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples); 
(d) an employee who is mourning the death of a partner, child or other close family member; (e) an employee whose home and property has been destroyed by a natural disaster such as a flood or cyclone; 
(f) an employee who is a victim of a violent crime. The above are examples only. There are many other possible scenarios where it would be appropriate to approve \223special leave for other exceptional circumstances\224. 
It is not mandatory for the employee to have exhausted other forms of paid leave prior to accessing \223special leave for other exceptional circumstances\224. 
  
 Directive 12/24  Page 10 of 12
 
 
 
In cases of family or domestic violence, leave should be granted to provide the employee with time off to: 
- seek safe housing - attend medical/counselling appointments 
- attend court hearings - access legal advice 
- organise alternate care or education arrangements for their children - rebuild support networks with children, family and others 
 Directive 12/24  Page 11 of 12
 
 
 
SCHEDULE THREE \226 LEAVE CONVERSION FORUMLAS  
1. Conversion of entitlements 1.1. This schedule sets out the formulas to be utilised when converting leave accruals to an alternative accrual basis. 
2. Leave entitlement in hours 2.1. If an employee\222s leave entitlement in a directive is expressed in working days, the leave entitlement may be read as if it were expressed in working 
hours using the following formula:  LE = WD x DH 
Where:  LE = Leave Entitlement 
 WD = Working Days  DH = Daily Hours (as defined by an industrial instrument) 
  Provided that the leave entitlement applies to part-time employees on a pro rata basis. 
3. Variation of ordinary working hours 3.1. If an entity\222s system for recording particulars of leave granted to an employee is based on hours and the daily hours (as defined by an industrial 
instrument) of an employee change, the leave entitlements accumulated by the employee are also to be recorded in hours.  
LAC = LBC    x  HAC 
              HBC  
 Where: LAC (leave entitlement after change) = the hours of leave to which the employee is entitled after the change. 
LBC (leave entitlement before change) = the employee\222s leave entitlement expressed in hours before the change. HAC (daily hours after change) = the employee\222s daily hours (as defined by an industrial instrument) after the change. 
HBC (daily hours before change) = the employee\222s daily hours (as defined by an industrial instrument) before the change. 
 Directive 12/24  Page 12 of 12
 
 