(iv) Residential Tenancies Employing Office;  (v) Trade and Investment Queensland; or 
(vi) Office of the Queensland Integrity Commissioner.  4.2 This directive does not apply to: 
(a) general employees other than those mentioned in clause 4.1(b); or (b) casual employees. 
 5. Recruitment and selection directive 
This directive must be applied in conjunction with the Public Sector Commissioner Directive relating to recruitment and selection.   
6. Higher duties across awards 6.1 This directive applies to employees performing higher duties under an award other than their substantive award, provided that the directive applies to the relevant callings in both awards. 
6.2 Where an employee is performing higher duties across awards, the period of higher duties will count towards the increment in the employee’s “lower classification level”. 6.3 Where an employee is performing work across awards at the same level, the period of work at the 
same level will count towards the increment in the employee’s substantive position.  
7. Definitions Except where otherwise defined, terms in this directive are consistent with their meanings in the Industrial Relations Act 2016 and/or the Public Sector Act 2022. 
7.1 “minimum period”:  where an employee is directed to assume the duties and responsibilities of a position at a “higher classification level” and where the “relevant percentage” is 75% or higher, “minimum period” 
means more than 3 consecutive working days;  where an employee is directed to assume the duties and responsibilities of a position at a “higher classification level” and where the “relevant percentage” is less than 75%, “minimum period” 
means 3 consecutive weeks;  where an employee is directed to assume the duties and responsibilities of a “higher classification level” part-time and where the “relevant percentage” is 75% or higher, “minimum 
period” means more than 3 cumulative working days during the relieving period;  where an employee is directed to assume the duties and responsibilities of a “higher classification level” part-time and where the “relevant percentage” is less than 75%, “minimum 
period” means 3 cumulative weeks during the relieving period;  the “minimum period” is not affected by leave taken during the relieving period. 
7.2 “higher classification level” for the purpose of this directive, means a classification level which has a higher maximum salary than the maximum salary of the classification level actually held by the employee. This includes a higher maximum salary under a section 155 contract under the PS 
Act, except where that contract requires specialised skills and the relieving employee does not possess those skills. 7.3 “lower classification level” for the purpose of this directive, means a lower classification level 
which has a lower maximum salary than the maximum salary of the classification level the employee is relieving at. 
  
  Directive 16/24  Page 2 of 6
 
 
===== page =====
7.4 “relevant percentage” means the percentage that, in the opinion of the chief executive, represents the extent to which the employee has assumed the full duties and responsibilities of the “higher classification level”. 
7.5 “relieving period” means the period in which an employee or employees have been directed to assume the duties and responsibilities of a higher classification level.  
8. Entitlements 8.1 An employee who is directed to assume, for any applicable “minimum period”, the duties and responsibilities of a “higher classification level” – 
 of an employee who is on leave (leave does not include accrued time off, time off in lieu or a rostered day off, unless it is continuous with other approved leave); or  of an employee who has been directed to perform other duties (including training, or work 
overseas or interstate); or  of a position which is vacant; 
is to be paid a higher duties amount as provided in this directive. 8.2 This directive applies to fixed term temporary employees only if they are directed to perform higher duties during the temporary period of employment. 
8.3 Where an industrial instrument applying to an employee provides a more beneficial entitlement than provided for in this directive, then the employee shall receive the entitlement as provided for in that industrial instrument. 
 9. Amount payable 
9.1 The higher duties amount payable consists of the "relevant percentage" of the difference between the employee’s substantive salary level and paypoint and the first paypoint of the “higher classification level” in which the employee will be relieving. For example, if the “relevant percentage” 
is deemed to be 100%, the employee will receive 100% of the difference between their substantive salary and paypoint and the first paypoint of the “higher classification level”.  9.2  However, if the conditions in clause 10 occur, then the higher paypoint as indicated in clause 10 
forms the basis of calculating the higher duties amount.  
10. Salary exceeds minimum or employee qualifies for higher paypoint 10.1 Where the substantive salary of the employee exceeds the first paypoint of the "higher classification level", the higher duties amount payable is to be based on the paypoint that is closest to but higher 
than the employee’s salary at their substantive level and paypoint before relieving in the higher position. 10.2 Where the employee has qualified for a higher paypoint of the “higher classification level”, the higher 
duties amount payable is to be based on the paypoint that the employee has qualified for.  
11. Payment of higher duties amount during recreation leave, long service leave and paid parental leave  An employee who takes recreation leave, long service leave or paid parental leave during a relieving 
period is entitled to be paid for the full period of such leave at the higher duties amount being paid to the employee immediately before the employee takes the leave. This will be the case even where the relieving period ceases on the last day of duty prior to the leave commencing, or at any point 
during the leave period.  
  
  Directive 16/24  Page 3 of 6
 
 
===== page =====
12. Payment of higher duties amount during all other forms of paid leave.  12.1 Subject to clause 12.2, an employee who takes any form of paid leave during a relieving period is to be paid the higher duties amount, for example: 
 sick leave;  carer’s leave; 
 bereavement leave;   compassionate leave;  
 domestic and family violence leave;  leave to sit examinations, or for authorised absences of less than 1 working day to attend lectures, to attend or participate in a course of study approved under the Ministerial Directive 
relating to Study and Examination Leave or any directive issued to replace it;   court attendance or jury service leave; 
 industrial relations education leave; and  paid special leave. 
12.2 Payment of the higher duties amount on a form of leave identified in clause 12.1 (other than leave types in clause 11) will cease when the relieving period ceases.  Examples 
An employee who is a substantive AO4 is approved to relieve in an AO5 position from 1 September to 1 November. The employee takes a period of sick leave from 15 October to 15 November. The employee is entitled to be paid the higher duties amount (AO5) from 15 October to 1 November and 
will revert to the employee’s substantive rate (AO4) from 2 November to 15 November. An employee who is a substantive AO4 is approved to relieve in an AO5 position from 1 September to 1 November. The employee takes sick leave on 2 November immediately following the period of 
higher duties. The employee is to be paid the sick leave at the employee’s substantive rate of pay (AO4).   
13. Payment of increments during relieving period 13.1 An employee is to move to the next paypoint within the “higher classification level” where – 
 the employee has met the performance objectives of the “higher classification level”; and  the employee has been relieving continuously in the “higher classification level” for 12 months; 
OR 
 the employee has been relieving non-continuously in the “higher classification level” for a period which aggregates in total a period of 12 months within the preceding 24 calendar month period. 13.2 An employee is to continue moving to the next paypoint(s) within the “higher classification level” 
where a previous paypoint as provided for in clause 13.1 has been received during relieving periods for a period of 12 months within the preceding 24 month period. 13.3 Where an employee has moved to the next paypoint within a “higher classification level” and the 
relieving period ceases, the employee will maintain that paypoint if the break in relieving has been less than 24 months and the employee re-commences relieving at the same “higher classification level” or another level which is lower than that level but higher than the employee’s substantive level. 
  Example 1      An employee who is a substantive level AO4 relieves in an AO6 position for a period of 12 months and progresses to the second paypoint. After 5 months on the second paypoint, the employee 
ceases relieving and returns to their substantive AO4 position for a period of 9 months. The employee 
  
  Directive 16/24  Page 4 of 6
 
 
===== page =====
then commences relieving in an AO6 position. The employee is to be paid at the second paypoint of the AO6 scale.   Continuing this example, where the relieving in the AO6 position continues for a further period of 7 
months, the employee is to move to the third paypoint of the AO6 scale.   Example 2 
  An employee who is a substantive level AO3 relieves in an AO5 position for a period of 12 months and progresses to the second paypoint. After 3 months on the second paypoint, the employee ceases relieving and returns to their substantive AO3 position for a period of 5 months. The employee 
then commences relieving in an AO4 position. The employee is to be paid at the second paypoint of the AO4 scale.   Continuing this example, where the relieving in the AO4 position continues for a further period of 9 
months, the employee is to move to the third paypoint of the AO4 scale. 13.4 All paid leave taken during periods of relieving
 in the “higher classification level” is recognised as 
service at the higher level for increment purposes. 
13.5 All unpaid leave taken during periods of relieving in the “higher classification level” is recognised as service at the higher level for increment purposes, subject to the provisions in the Ministerial Directive relating to Leave without Salary Credited as Service. 
13.6 Employees who are directed to assume the duties and responsibilities of a “higher classification level” part-time shall be entitled to increments in accordance with the relevant industrial instrument under which the duties and responsibilities are being performed.  
13.7 The “relevant percentage” has no effect on the entitlement to increments during the relieving period. 13.8 Where the relevant industrial instrument provides for increments on other than a 12 monthly basis, the 12 month timeframe referred to in clauses 13.1 and 13.2 is to be substituted with the period 
stated in the industrial instrument for incremental progression.  14. Recognition of higher duties upon permanent employment  
14.1 Relieving period/s are to be recognised as service for the purpose of determining the paypoint and increment date of an employee who is subsequently permanently employed at a “higher classification level” where the following conditions are satisfied:  
(a) the relieving was at the same or at a higher level to the classification level to which the employee has been permanently employed; and (b) the employee has met the performance objectives of the “higher classification level” at which 
the employee relieved. 14.2 The relieving period/s which are to be recognised as service for the purpose of determining the paypoint and increment date of an employee who is subsequently permanently employed at a “higher 
classification level” are the greater of: (a) all continuous relieving service immediately preceding the permanent employment;  
OR 
(b) non-continuous relieving service for a period which aggregates in total a period of 12 months or more within the immediately preceding 24 calendar months. 14.3 Notwithstanding clause 14.2, where an employee has qualified for a higher paypoint of the “higher 
classification level” through previous relieving in accordance with clause 13, the employee shall be permanently employed at that higher paypoint, provided that the employee has relieved at that “higher classification level” within the 12 months immediately preceding the permanent employment. 
 15. Public holiday 
15.1 For public holidays falling within the relieving period, the higher duties amount is to be paid unless the public holiday falls during leave without pay. 
  
  Directive 16/24  Page 5 of 6
 
 
===== page =====
15.2 The higher duties amount is to be paid for public holidays that fall during paid leave within the relieving period.  15.3 Where an employee takes long service leave or recreation leave immediately following a relieving 
period and a public holiday falls within the period of leave or immediately prior to accessing the period of leave, the higher duties amount is paid for the public holiday and the period of leave. 16. Termination of services during relieving period  
16.1 Where an employee is within a relieving period on the last day of employment and has accrued long service leave, recreation leave and/or leave loading that is to be paid out on termination, payment is to include the higher duties amount the employee receives immediately before termination. 
16.2 Where an employee is entitled to payment for public holidays which fall within the period of accrued recreation leave and/or long service leave paid out on termination, payment for public holidays is to include the higher duties amount the employee receives immediately before termination. 
   
   
   
   
    
  
  Directive 16/24  Page 6 of 6
 
 
