5. Entitlement   5.1 An employee is entitled to recreation leave (including on a half pay basis) as provided in this directive.  
5.2 The granting of half pay recreation leave is subject to the discretion of the chief executive taking into account service delivery requirements and financial considerations.  
6. Accrual of leave and increments  6.1 Employees are entitled to recreation leave of 20 working days (calculated in hours depending on the hours of duty prescribed) for each completed year of service and a proportionate 
amount for an incomplete year of service. 6.2 Leave prescribed in this directive may be converted to an hourly basis for the purpose of applying, granting and recording of the leave. Schedule Two provides conversion formulas. 
6.3 The period of the half pay recreation leave will be recognised as normal full-time or part-time service applying to the employee at the time of taking the leave, i.e. increments and the accrual of sick, recreation and long service leave will remain at the normal entitlement for the 
period of half pay recreation leave for employees working full-time and at the relevant proportional rate for employees working part-time. 6.4 For additional conditions applicable to employees other than general employees, refer to 
Schedule One.   
7. Application for recreation leave  7.1 Applications for recreation leave are to be made in writing or some other form determined by the chief executive. Employees who require a more accessible format should have an 
alternative made available as a reasonable adjustment.  
8. Timely notice  8.1 An employee is to give timely notice of the date from which they wish to take leave. 
8.2 The employer must respond to a request to take leave in a timely manner indicating whether the leave applied for has been approved or not. If an application for recreation leave has not been approved, the employee is to be advised of the specific reasons for refusal, and the 
anticipated date from which it is expected that leave may be taken.  
9. Timing of leave  9.1 An employee and chief executive may agree when the employee is to take recreation leave. 
9.2 If the employee and the chief executive cannot agree, the chief executive – (a) may decide when the employee is to take leave keeping in mind the needs of the entity; and 
(b) must give the employee at least 8 weeks written notice of the start and end date of the leave.  
 
  
 Directive 11/24  Page 2 of 9 
 
 
===== page =====
10. Deduction from accumulated balance 10.1 Recreation leave granted to an employee is to be deducted from the employee’s accumulated balance. The balance of leave not taken is to be taken into account when determining the 
employee’s next leave entitlement.  
11. Locality Allowance 11.1 Those employees with an entitlement to locality allowance or district/divisional parities under the applicable directive or industrial instrument will be paid this allowance while on recreation 
leave.  11.2 This allowance/parity will be paid on a proportionate basis for the period of any half pay recreation leave i.e. half the normal entitlement. 
 12. Public Holiday Falling Within a Period of Recreation Leave 
12.1 On full pay basis (a) Recreation leave is exclusive of any public holiday that falls during the period of the leave.  
(b) If there is a requirement to take a minimum period of recreation leave, the recreation leave will be extended by any public holiday falling on an employee’s normal working day during the period of the leave.  
12.2 On half pay basis (a) Public holidays falling within periods of half pay recreation leave are paid at the employee’s normal full-time or part-time rate. 
(b) Where a public holiday falls before the start of, or following the completion of, a period of half pay recreation leave, it shall be paid at the employee’s normal full-time or part-time rate. 
(c) Where the public holiday is preceded by a period of half pay recreation leave and followed by a period of unpaid leave, the public holiday shall be paid at the employee’s normal full-time or part-time rate. 
(d) Where the public holiday is preceded by a period of unpaid leave and followed by a period of half pay recreation leave, the public holiday shall be paid at the employee’s normal full-time or part-time rate. 
 13. Absences of less than one day 
13.1 Employees are encouraged to use other forms of leave designed for short absences (less than one day) before seeking to take recreation leave for such purposes. No minimum period applies to recreation leave except where an entity policy specifies recreation leave to be taken 
in whole days.  
14. Leave is debited based on the number of hours that the employee would have worked 14.1 If an employee is rostered to work a specific number of hours on a day and the employee is absent from duty on that day, or for part of it, the employee’s leave account is to be reduced. 
This reduction will be the number of hours that the employee was rostered to work on that day but did not work. This applies even though the employee’s leave account is debited by a 
  
 Directive 11/24  Page 3 of 9 
 
 
===== page =====
                   
                                               
                                     
                     
                             
15. Sick Leave instead of Recreation Leave on Half Pay 15.1 Where sick leave is granted after starting a period of recreation leave on half pay, such sick leave granted in lieu in accordance with the Ministerial Directive relating to Sick Leave
2
 shall also be at half pay.  
16. Payment of recreation leave and loading 16.1 Recreation leave and loading is calculated as follows:  
Calculations relating to recreation leave and leave loading for those employees receiving an “annualised” salary are as prescribed in the relevant industrial instrument –  For employees other than shift workers covered by this directive – the rate of wage or 
salary prescribed in the relevant certified agreement plus a loading calculated at the rate of 17.5% of this amount; For non-continuous shift workers –  
The higher of: (a) the rate of wage or salary prescribed in the relevant certified agreement and paid to the employee at the ordinary time rate and in accordance with the employee’s roster or 
projected roster including weekend or public holiday shifts,  or:  
(b) the rate of wage or salary prescribed in the relevant certified agreement excluding ordinary shift, weekend and public holiday penalties ordinarily payable in accordance with the employee’s roster or projected roster plus a loading calculated at the rate of 17.5% of this 
amount. For continuous shift workers – the rate of wage or salary prescribed in the relevant certified agreement excluding ordinary shift, weekend and public holiday penalties ordinarily payable in 
accordance with the employee’s roster or projected roster plus a loading calculated at the rate of 27.5% of this amount. 
 
2 For employees that the Ministerial Directive relating to Sick Leave applies to.  
  
 Directive 11/24  Page 4 of 9 
 
 
===== page =====
                                     
                                             
                         

  
17. Payment upon termination 17.1 Recreation leave and/or leave loading payable as a lump sum amount as at the date of termination of employment shall be payable at the rate prescribed for the employee’s 
substantive position. However, where the employee is within a higher duties relieving period on the last day of employment (i.e. date of termination), and has accrued recreation leave and/or leave loading that is to be paid out on termination, payment is at the ordinary rate of 
pay the employee receives immediately before termination (i.e. the higher duties amount) in accordance with section 38(5) of the Industrial Relations Act 2016 (IR Act). 17.2 Additionally, the person is to be paid for any public holiday, special holiday or substituted day 
under the Holidays Act 1983, to which they would have been entitled if they had still been an employee and had actually taken the leave. 17.3 If the person also has an entitlement to a cash equivalent of long service leave, the additional 
payment for public or special holidays shall only be made for the one type of leave.  
18. Advance on leave 18.1 An employee and the chief executive may agree that the employee takes all or any part of the employee’s annual leave before becoming entitled to it. 
18.2 The chief executive may advance recreation leave to an employee up to a maximum equivalent to one (1) year’s accrual from the time of the employee’s request for an advance on recreation leave. 
18.3 The chief executive should only agree to an advance on leave where the employee agrees to authorise, that in the event of termination of employment prior to the accrual of any leave advanced, such cash equivalent amount equal to advanced leave not accrued shall be 
withheld from any monies owing, including salary, paid leave, public holidays or redundancy payments.  
19. Payment on an employee’s death 19.1 Where a recreation leave entitlement is payable to an employee who has died, the payment will be made to the employee’s legal personal representative.  
  
 
 
3 For employees that the Ministerial Directive relating to Higher Duties applies to 
  
 Directive 11/24  Page 5 of 9 
 
 
===== page =====
20. Compulsory Closure of Government Establishments during the Christmas/New Year Period 20.1 During each Christmas/New Year period, a compulsory closure of Government 
establishments, or restricted staffing as determined by a chief executive, shall occur. 20.2 Leave on full pay without debit during the Christmas/New Year closure period – employees will be granted one (1) working day on full pay without debit to any leave account including 
those on recreation leave and long service leave. Employees on any other form of leave do not qualify for the one (1) day leave on full pay without debit to any leave accounts. Note that TOIL, accrued time and RDOs are not leave for the purposes of this clause.  
20.3 All remaining working days of the Christmas/New Year closure shall be debited to either –   recreation leave; or 
 long service leave; or  time-off-in-lieu of overtime (TOIL); or 
 accrued hours under departmental hours of work arrangements; or  banked rostered days off; or 
 leave without pay. 20.4 Specific arrangements for the Christmas/New Year closure period are contained in a Circular issued each year by the department responsible for industrial relations. 
 21. Definitions  
Except where otherwise defined, terms in this directive are consistent with their meanings in the Industrial Relations Act 2016 and/or the Public Sector Act 2022. Continuous shift work means work done by employees where the hours of work are 
regularly rotated in accordance with a shift roster covering a 24 hour per day operation over a seven (7) day week. Daily hours means –  
 the number of ordinary daily working hours of an employee as specified in an industrial instrument (as defined).   in any other case – the number of hours determined from the relevant industrial 
instrument (as defined) as the average number of hours of an employee during a pay period or other period reasonable in the circumstances.  Industrial instrument for the purposes of this directive, except for clause 3 (Legislative 
Authority) and clause 4 (Application), means an award, agreement (including a certified agreement), contract, former determination of the Governor-in-Council or directive. Northern and Western Region consists of any part of the State not contained within the 
Southern and Eastern Region. Southern and Eastern Region consists of any part of the State, which is both south of the 22nd parallel of south latitude; and east of 147 east longitude; but excluding the township of 
Moranbah.  Teacher means a person defined in Schedule 3 of the Education (Queensland College of Teachers) Act 2005. 
  
 Directive 11/24  Page 6 of 9 
 
 
===== page =====
SCHEDULE ONE – ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS APPLICABLE OTHER THAN TO GENERAL EMPLOYEES  1. Entitlement 
1.1 An employee, other than a general employee, is subject to the additional conditions in this schedule.  
2. Accrual of leave 2.1 An employee is entitled to recreation leave in accordance with the following – 
(a) Southern and Eastern Region – 20 working days (calculated in hours depending on the hours of duty prescribed) for each completed year of service and a proportionate amount for an incomplete year of service if the employee’s headquarters are in the Southern and 
Eastern Region. (b) Continuous shift workers in the Southern and Eastern Region only are entitled to an additional one (1) week recreation leave per year in addition to the above entitlements. 
(c) Northern and Western Region (including continuous shift workers) – 25 working days (calculated in hours depending on the hours of duty prescribed) for each completed year of service and a proportionate amount for an incomplete year of service if the employee’s 
headquarters are in the Northern and Western Region. 2.2 For full conditions applicable to all employees, including general employees, refer clause 6.1 to 6.3 of this directive. 
 3. Recall, cancellation or deferral of leave 
3.1 A chief executive may, if entity circumstances so require it – (a) recall an employee from recreation leave; or 
(b) cancel the approval of any recreation leave; or (c) defer the taking of recreation leave. 
3.2 An employee is to be allowed to take any recreation leave from which they have been recalled or which was cancelled or deferred. This leave may be taken at the earliest time that is mutually convenient to the employee and the chief executive having regard to the operational 
requirements of the employer. 3.3 Where an employee has incurred expenses, such as deposit payments, relating to payments for accommodation and/or travel for the employee and/or their immediate family, and those 
expenses are lost due to a recall, cancellation or deferral of leave by the chief executive, the expenses will be reimbursed by the entity. Such reimbursement is conditional upon the employee producing evidence of losses incurred, in the form of receipts or other evidence to 
the satisfaction of the chief executive.  
4. Payment of recreation leave and loading 4.1 For those employees (other than continuous shift workers) accruing 25 working days in the Northern and Western Region, the chief executive may choose to pay 14% leave loading on 
25 days accrual in lieu of 17.5% loading on 20 days accrual. 4.2 For full conditions applicable to all employees, including general employees, refer clause 16 of this directive.  
  
 Directive 11/24  Page 7 of 9 
 
 
===== page =====
5. Movement of Employees Across/Within Public Service Entities (Excluding Machinery of Government Changes) 5.1 Public Service Officers –  
(a) Where a public service officer moves between/within public service entities due to a promotion or transfer at level, the recreation leave accrual (including leave loading) shall automatically transfer with no movement of funds between the former and new public 
service entities/work areas.  (b) However, for a movement between public service entities where the recreation leave balance exceeds two (2) years accrual, funds representing the total recreation leave 
balance shall be paid by the former entity to the new entity. The transfer of funds is not required where both public service entities participate in the annual leave central scheme.  
5.2 Fixed Term Temporary Employees –  (a) Between public service entities –  
(i) Where a fixed term temporary employee employed under section 150 of the PS Act obtains either another fixed-term temporary position or a permanent public service officer position in a different public service entity, all recreation leave accrued 
(including leave loading) as at date of ceasing employment with the former public service entity shall be paid out by the former public service entity to the fixed term temporary employee. 
(ii) However, with the consent of the employee concerned, and where the former and new public service entity agree, the total recreation leave balance (including leave loading) may be transferred from the former entity to the new entity together with a 
transfer of funds representing the leave transferred. The transfer of funds is not required where both public service entities participate in the annual leave central scheme. 
(b) Within a public service entity –  (i) Where a fixed term temporary employee employed under section 150 of the PS Act obtains:  
(ii) another fixed term temporary position; or (iii) a permanent public service officer position, or 
(iv) a new fixed term temporary contract of employment in the same temporary position, within the same public service entity and without any break in service, all recreation leave accrued shall automatically transfer with the employee. 
  
  
 Directive 11/24  Page 8 of 9 
 
 
===== page =====
SCHEDULE TWO – CONVERSION FORMULAS  
1. Conversion of entitlements 1.1 This schedule sets out the formulas to be utilised when converting recreation leave accruals to an alternative accrual basis.  
 2. Leave entitlement in hours 
2.1 If an employee’s leave entitlement is expressed in working days, the leave entitlement may be read as if it were expressed in working hours using the following formula: LE = WD x DH 
Where:  LE = Leave Entitlement 
 WD = Working Days  DH = Daily Hours (as defined by an industrial instrument) 
 3. Variation of ordinary working hours 
3.1 If an entity’s system for recording particulars of leave granted to an employee is based on working hours and the daily hours (as defined by an industrial instrument) of an employee change, the leave entitlements accumulated by the employee are also to be recorded in 
hours. The formula for this conversion is as follows:  
LAC = LBC   x  
HAC 
        HBC  
Where: LAC (leave entitlement after change) = the hours of leave to which the employee is entitled after the change. 
LBC (leave entitlement before change) = the employee’s leave entitlement expressed in hours before the change. HAC (daily hours after change) = the employee’s daily hours (as defined by an industrial 
instrument) after the change. HBC (daily hours before change) = the employee’s daily hours (as defined by an industrial instrument) before the change. 
  
 
  
 Directive 11/24  Page 9 of 9 
 
 
