 
Staff to Young Person Ratio
 
2.16
 
Safety, Health and Wellbeing
 
2.15
 
 
Rest Pauses
Meal Breaks and 
 
2.14
 
 
Cleveland Youth Detention Centre General Employees
 
2.13
 
Youth Detention Skilled Worker (Retention) Allowance
 
2.12
 
Soiled Linen Allowance
 
2.11
 

 
2.10
 
Consolidated Shift Allowance
 
2.9
 
s
Locality Allowance
 
2.8
 
Averaging of Ordinary Hours of Work
 
2.7
 
Extra Leave for Proportionate Salary (Purchased Leave)
 
2.6
 
Aggregated Hours
 
2.5
 
Annual Leave Loading Payment
 
2.4
 
No Loss of Show Day
 
2.3
 
ment (COLA) Payments
Cost of Living Adjust
 
2.2
 
Wage Rates
New 
 
2.1
 
PART 2: WAGES, ALLOWANCES AND OTHER CONDITIONS
 
Definitions and Abbreviations
 
1.8
 
Equity Considerations
 
1.7
 
Objectives of this Agreement
 
1.6
 
Relationship to Awards, Industrial Instruments and Directives
 
1.5
 
Posting of Agreement
 
1.4
 
Operation
 
1.3
 
Parties bound
 
1.2
 
Title
 
1.1
 
PART 1: APPLICATION AND OPERATION
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
2023
YOUTH DETENTION CENTRE CERTIFIED AGREEMENT 
 
)
139
/
2023
(No. CB/
 
, Industrial Union of Employees, Queensland.

United 
 
, Queensland; and
of Employees
 

 
Together Queensland, Industrial Union of Employees;
 
AND
 
)
, Employment, Small Business and Training
State of Queensland (Department of Youth Justice
 
Industrial Relations Act 2016
 
QUEENSLAND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
 
1
===== page =====
 
2.17 Hepatitis Vaccinations 
2.18 No Further Claims 
PART 3: TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT 
PART 4: RECOGNITION OF ACCREDITED QUALIFICATIONS 
4.1 Commitment 
4.2 Appropriate Remuneration 
PART 5: CULTURAL AWARENESS AND LEAVE 
PART 6: PAID PARENTAL LEAVE 
PART 7: EMPLOYMENT SECURITY AND PERMANENT EMPLOYMENT 
7.1 Employment Security 
7.2 Permanent Employment 
7.3 Temporary Employment 
7.4 Organisational Change and Restructuring 
PART 8: SALARY PACKAGING 
PART 9: CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEES 
PART 10: COLLECTIVE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS 
PART 11: ILO CONVENTIONS 
PART 12: UNION ENCOURAGEMENT 
PART 13: UNION DELEGATES 
PART 14: INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS EDUCATION LEAVE 
PART 15: PREVENTION AND SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES 
PART 16: WORKLOAD MANAGEMENT 
PART 17: FAIR CAREER PATHS 
17.1 General Provisions 
17.2 Improving Internal Merit-based Career Paths 
PART 18: FAIR TREATMENT AT WORK 
PART 19: IMPROVING GENDER EQUITY 
PART 20: WORK/LIFE BALANCE 
PART 21: WORKPLACE BULLYING 
PART 22: SUPPORT FOR WORKERS WITH MENTAL ILLNESS 
PART 23: BEHAVIOUR MANAGEMENT MODEL FOR YOUNG PEOPLE IN YOUTH DETENTION  
       CENTRES 
APPENDIX 1: SALARY SCHEDULES 
===== page =====
 
APPENDIX 2: LOCALITY ALLOWANCE AREAS 
APPENDIX 3: EMPLOYMENT SECURITY POLICY 
APPENDIX 4: QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT POLICY ON THE CONTRACTING-OUT OF SERVICES 
APPENDIX 5: QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT COMMITMENT TO UNION ENCOURAGEMENT 
===== page =====
 
PART 1: APPLICATION AND OPERATION 
1.1 Title 
(1) This Agreement will be known as the Youth Detention Centre Certified Agreement 2023. 
1.2 Parties bound 
(1) This Agreement is binding upon: 
(a) The State of Queensland; 
(b) Employees employed by the State of Queensland in Youth Detention Centres in the 
Department of Youth Justice, Employment, Small Business and Training to whom the 
following Awards apply: 
(i) Youth Detention Centre Employees Award  State 2016; 
(ii) General Employees (Queensland Government Departments) and other Employees 
Award  State 2015; and 
(c) Together Queensland, Industrial Union of Employees; The Australian Workers' Union of 
Employees, Queensland; and United , Industrial Union of Employees, 
Queensland. 
(2) For the avoidance of doubt, the following persons are not covered by this Agreement: 
(a) Chief Executives, Senior Executives and Senior Officers under the Public Sector Act 2022; 
appointments made on a fixed term declared under section 155 of the Public Sector Act 2022; 
employees engaged under contractual arrangements (this does not refer to employees under 
sections 149 and 150 of the Public Sector Act 2022 engaged for a fixed term); ; and 
(b) Employees in the Department of Youth Justice, Employment, Small Business and Training 
covered by a separate instrument. 
1.3 Operation 
(1) The Agreement operates from date of certification and has a nominal expiry date of 31 July 2026.          
The parties have agreed that the terms of the Agreement will be given operative effect on and from              
1 August 2023, unless otherwise specified in this Agreement. 
(2) For the purpose of section 228(3)(a) of the Industrial Relations Act 2016, this Agreement shall be 
terminated upon the certification of a replacement agreement or the making of a replacement arbitration 
determination in relation to the employees covered by this Agreement, unless otherwise agreed by the 
parties. 
1.4 Posting of Agreement 
(1) A copy of this Agreement must be displayed in a conspicuous place at the workplace, where it can be 
easily read by employees in the workplace. Electronic access to this Agreement where available is 
sufficient to meet the requirements of this clause. 
1.5 Relationship to Awards, Industrial Instruments and Directives 
(1) This Agreement replaces the Youth Detention Centre Certified Agreement 2019. 
(2) The parties agree to terminate the Youth Detention Centre Certified Agreement 2019 at an appropriate 
time on or following certification of this Agreement. 
===== page =====
 
(3) This Agreement is to be read in conjunction with awards as amended or replaced from time to time and 
industrial instruments covering employees covered by this Agreement. The provision of these awards 
and industrial instruments, as amended from time to time shall apply, provided that any amendment 
which would result in a diminution of an 
commencement of this Agreement shall not apply. In the event of any inconsistency with these awards 
and industrial instruments, the terms of this Agreement will take precedence. 
1.6 Objectives of this Agreement 
(1) The employer provides a service that affects the daily lives of all Queenslanders. The parties are 
committed to an effective department, delivering quality services to Queenslanders to support the 
s to the community. The employer will strive for improvements 
in service delivery, improved efficiency and effectiveness of its operations and activities. 
1.7 Equity Considerations 
(1) This Agreement will achieve the principal objects specified in sections 4(i), 4(j), 4(k), 4(l), 4(m) and 4(r) 
of the Industrial Relations Act 2016. The employer will respect and value the diversity of our employees 
through helping to prevent and eliminate discrimination. 
(2) The effect of this Agreement is not to allow any conduct or treatment, either direct or indirect that would 
contravene the Anti-Discrimination Act 1991. 
(3) This Agreement provides for remuneration based on classification levels related to skills required to 
perform the role so that a female employee doing the same work as a male employee will receive equal 
remuneration.  
(4) Part 19 of this Agreement acknowledges the commitments of the parties to improving gender equity, to 
achieve fair and equitable outcomes. 
1.8 Definitions and Abbreviations 
ACC 
Framework. 
Australian Qualifications Framework (AQF) means the national system of recognition for the issue of 
vocational qualifications. The AQF is available via the Australian Government Department of Education website 
www.aqf.edu.au  
CC means a Consultative Committee within the Agency Consultative Framework, other than the ACC. 
Commission means the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission. 
Continuous shift worker means as per the definition provided in the relevant award. 
Directive means a Queensland Government Directive issued (and as amended) by the Minister for Industrial 
Relations or the Commission Chief Executive of Public Service Commission in accordance with sections 53 or 
54 of the Public Sector Act 2022. 
Employer means the Department of Youth Justice , Employment, Small Business and Training 
Government means the Queensland Government unless otherwise specified. 
ILO means International Labour Organisation. 
Non-continuous shift worker means as per the definition provided in the relevant award. 
PSTP means Public Sector Training Package. 
===== page =====
 
Rostered day off means as per the definition provided in the relevant award. 
Scheduled day off means as per the definition provided in the relevant award. 
PART 2: WAGES, ALLOWANCES AND OTHER CONDITIONS 
2.1 New Wage Rates 
(1) The Agreement provides for the following wage increases: 
 1 August 2023  4% to be applied to the last agreement rates as contained in the Youth Detention 
Centre Certified Agreement 2019; 
 1 August 2024  4% to be applied to the agreement rates resulting at 1 August 2023, as above, and 
 1 August 2025  3% to be applied to the agreement rates resulting at 1 August 2024, as above. 
(2) The salary schedules  are set out in Appendix 1 of this Agreement.  
2.2 Cost of Living Adjustment (COLA) Payments 
2.2.1  Definitions 
The following definitions apply for the purposes of the Cost-of-Living Adjustments (COLA) Payments clause: 
COLA year  means one of the three 12-month periods from 1 August in one year to 31 July in the following 
year that includes a calculation date. The COLA years will be: 
 1 August 2022  31 July 2023 (COLA year 1);  
 1 August 2023  31 July 2024 (COLA year 2); and 
 1 August 2024  31 July 2025 (COLA year 3).  
base wages  for an eligible employee, means the salary actually payable to the particular employee in the relevant 
COLA year for work covered by the predecessor agreement in COLA year 1, or this Agreement in COLA year 2 
and 3, and includes higher duties performed by the employee under the predecessor agreement or this Agreement 
and includes the casual loading where applicable. It does not include any other allowances or additional payments 
howsoever described (such as: disability allowances or special rates, all-purpose allowances, overtime payments, 
shift penalties, weekend penalties, public holiday penalties, aggregated penalties or allowances, any payments of 
accrued leave where the leave is not taken; any payments for TOIL where the TOIL is not taken, COLA payments 
from previous periods, etc). 
calculation date  means, either: 
  31 July 2023 (COLA payment year 1); or 
  31 July 2024 (COLA payment year 2); or 
  31 July 2025 (COLA payment year 3). 
COLA payment percentage  see clause 2.2.4(2) 
CPI  means the Brisbane Consumer Price Index (all groups, March quarter annual percentage change from the 
March quarter of the previous year), for the March that falls within the relevant COLA year, as published by the 
Australian Bureau of Statistics. Treasury will advise agencies of the CPI relevant to COLA considerations upon 
its release in each year. 
eligible employee  see clause 2.2.3. 
predecessor agreement  means the Youth Detention Centre Certified Agreement 2019. 
Queensland government employee  means a person employed in a government entity, as defined in section 24 
of the repealed Public Service Act 2008 as in force at 1 October 2022, and the entities specified at sections 
24(2)(c), 24(2)(d) and 24(2)(h) of the Act: the parliamentary service, 
associated administrative unit, and the police service. 
wage increase under the Agreement  means the wage increase of either 4%, 4% or 3%, as specified in clause 
2.1 of this Agreement, that occurs on the day after the end of the COLA year. For example, for the purposes of 
===== page =====
 
calculating COLA year 1 (1 August 2022 to 31 July 2023), the wage increase of 4% on 1 August 2023 is the wage 
increase under the Agreement.  
2.2.2  Obligation for payment  
(1) The employer will make COLA payments as required by this clause 2.2.  
2.2.3  Eligibility 
 
(1) Eligible employees covered by this Agreement may be entitled to receive Cost of Living Adjustment 
(COLA) payments based on the calculation dates, for up to three years only, and ending for the 
calculation date of 31 July 2025. 
(2) For the COLA year 1, an employee is an eligible employee if they performed work under the predecessor 
agreement during COLA year 1, and they were covered by the predecessor agreement on the calculation date 
of 31 July 2023.  
(3) For COLA years 2 and 3, an employee is an eligible employee if they performed work under this Agreement 
during the relevant COLA year, and they are covered by this Agreement on the relevant calculation date for 
the associated COLA Payment. 
(4) In recognition of employee mobility across the sector, where an employee would otherwise be an eligible 
employee in accordance with clause 2.2.3(2) or 2.2.3(3), but they are not covered by this Agreement (or the 
predecessor agreement in the case of COLA year 1)  on the relevant calculation date due to being employed 
elsewhere as a Queensland government employee on the calculation date, they will be deemed to be an 
eligible employee for the associated COLA payment. To facilitate payment of the COLA payment in this 
circumstance, the employee is required to provide relevant details of their eligibility to Human Resources, 
Department of Youth Justice, Employment, Small Business and Training via email 
Corporate.HR@desbt.qld.gov.au.  
Example  an employee works for the first 3 months under the predecessor agreement, or under this 
Agreement, during a relevant COLA year, then takes up employment under a different agreement. They 
remain employed under the different agreement as at the relevant calculation date under this Agreement. 
Provided the employee provides the required notice and details of their current employer (as specified above) 
which confirms that they are a Queensland government employee as at the calculation date, they will be an 
eligible employee for that particular COLA payment (see clause 2.2.3 (6) for pro-rata payments). 
(5) An employee who starts being covered by this Agreement or the predecessor agreement after a calculation 
date is not eligible for the associated COLA payment. For COLA year 1 also see clause 2.2.3(2). 
 
Example  an employee starts being covered by the Agreement on 17 September 2023. The employee is not 
eligible for COLA payment year 1.  
(6) An eligible employee who did not perform work under the predecessor agreement or this Agreement for 
the full COLA year, will receive a pro-rata COLA payment by reference to the base wages they received 
that was attributable to work under the predecessor agreement or this Agreement.  
 
Example one  an eligible employee is employed and works for 5 months under the predecessor agreement 
or this Agreement during a relevant COLA year. Their base wages for the COLA year will reflect the 5 
months they worked.  
 
Example two  an eligible employee is employed for 12 months under the predecessor agreement or this 
Agreement during a relevant COLA year and in those 12 months, works for 6 months, takes 3 months leave 
at half pay and takes 3 months leave without pay. Their base wages for the COLA year will reflect the 6 
months they worked, 3 months where they earned half pay and 3 months where they earned no pay.  
 
Example three  an employee is employed for 12 months under the predecessor agreement or this Agreement 
during a relevant COLA year and in those 12 months, works for 6 months and is temporarily seconded and 
works for 6 months under a different Agreement. Their base wages for the COLA year will then reflect the 6 
months they worked under the predecessor agreement or this Agreement. 
===== page =====
 
(7) An eligible employee who is casual or part-time will receive a pro-rata COLA payment based on the hours 
they worked in the relevant COLA year because of the definition of base wages.  
 
Example  a part-time employee works 0.6 full-time equivalent during the CO
wages for the COLA year reflect their hours of work. 
(8) In addition to the other requirements of clause 2.2.3, casual employees are eligible employees provided 
they have performed work under the predecessor agreement or this Agreement, or as a Queensland 
government employee, within the 12-week payroll period immediately prior to the relevant calculation 
date.  
 
2.2.4  Calculation and payments 
 
Step one 
(1) A COLA Payment is only payable if, for the relevant COLA year, CPI exceeds the wage increase under the 
Agreement that occurs on the day after the end of the COLA year. 
Step two 
(2) The relevant COLA Payment is calculated by first determining the percentage difference between the wage 
increase under the Agreement and CPI for the relevant COLA year and each COLA Payment is capped at 
 
 
Example one: For COLA Payment Year 1, the COLA year is 1 August 2022 to 31 July 2023. The wage 
increase under the Agreement is 4% on 1 August 2023. In April 2023, the ABS releases the CPI figure for 
March 2023 as 7.4%. The COLA payment is calculated as the difference between 4% and 7.4%, i.e. 3.4%. 
However, because the COLA payment is capped at 3%, the COLA percentage is 3%. 
 
Example two: For COLA Payment Year 3, the COLA year is 1 August 2024 to 31 July 2025. The wage 
increase under the Agreement is 3% on 1 August 2025. In April 2025, the ABS releases the CPI figure for 
March 2025 as 3.9%. The COLA payment is calculated as the difference between 3% and 3.9%, i.e. 0.9%. 
0.9% is less than the 3% cap, therefore the COLA percentage is 0.9%.  
 
Step three 
(3) To calculate an  base wages for the COLA year 
are to be determined.  
 
Note  no adjustment to base wages is necessary as the relevant wage increase under the Agreement has not 
been applied for the COLA year.   
 
Step four 
(4) The figure from clause 2.2.4(3) is then multiplied by the COLA Percentage calculated in clause 2.2.4(2) to 
COLA year. 
 
Example: The COLA percentage is 3% and base wages is $90,000.  
 
 $90,000 multiplied by 3% = $2,700.00 
 
(5) COLA Payments are one-off, do not form part of base salary and will be taxed according to the applicable 
law. 
 
2.2.5  Timing of information and payments 
(1) For eligible employees under clause 2.2.3(2) and 2.2.3(4), if payable, the relevant COLA payment will 
be made within two (2) months following certification or the employee providing the notice of their 
employment pursuant to clause 2.2.3 (4) following certification. 
===== page =====
 
 
(2) For eligible employees under clause 2.2.3(3) and 2.2.3(4), if payable, the relevant COLA Payment will 
be made within two (2) months of the latter: the relevant calculation date and release of the CPI or the 
employee providing the notice of their employment pursuant to clause 2.2.3(4). 
 
(3) The department will provide advice to unions and employees covered by this Agreement on the timing 
of payroll processing for each COLA payment.  
2.3 No Loss of Show Day 
(1) Where an employee is required to perform work duties (including training) at an alternative location to 
the place where the employee is based for work purposes on a day where the show day holiday applies, 

supervisor. 
(2) Provided that an employee subject to this Agreement, and whether engaged in different Government 
entities or locations over a calendar year or not, is only entitled to leave on full pay for a show holiday 
once each calendar year. 
2.4 Annual Leave Loading Payment 
(1) Payment of annual leave loading will be consolidated and paid to all employees during December of 
each year. 
(2) It is at the discretion of the employer to determine whether it wishes to apply this clause to non-
continuous and/or continuous shift workers. 
2.5 Aggregated Hours 
(1) Where agreed between the employer and employee, and subject to policy requirements, an employee 
may work varied weekly hours provided that at the end of an agreed work cycle of 3 months or more the 
employee has worked the total ordinary hours for the work cycle. 
(2) This provision is designed to cater mainly for seasonal work or work units which have discernible peaks 
and troughs in workloads at different times of the year. 
(3) Overtime arrangements/penalty rates apply to work in excess of the agreed hours of duty. 
(4) This provision may be implemented by agreement between management and the majority of employees 
affected in the workplace. 
2.6 Extra Leave for Proportionate Salary (Purchased Leave) 
(1) Where agreed between the employer and employee, and subject to policy requirements, employees can 
agree to work reduced months in a year and receive a proportionate salary over a full twelve month 
period, where this arrangement meets the operational needs of the employer. 
 
2.7 Averaging of Ordinary Hours of Work 
(1) Where agreed between the employer and employee, and subject to policy requirements, mechanisms will 
operate by which employees can agree to average ordinary hours of work over a cycle with differential 
daily and weekly hours, e.g. in a four week work cycle an employee may work 45 hours in one week 
and 30 hours the next week, provided that the total standard ordinary hours for the month are worked. 
Under this arrangement the agreed working hours for individual employees would be established in 
consultation between management and the employee. Normal overtime  arrangements/penalty rates will 
only apply for the hours worked in excess of the agreed hours of duty. 
 
===== page =====
 
2.8 Locality Allowances 
(1) Locality allowances are payable to eligible employees in accordance with the Directive relating to 
Locality Allowances (as amended).. 
(2) The rates prescribed by the Directive 19/99 (Locality Allowances) are increased by 5.5% from 1 January 
1997 for all centres other than those in coastal local government areas as at that date and listed in 
Appendix 2 of this Agreement. 
2.9 Consolidated Shift Allowance 
(1) It has been agreed that 12 hour shift arrangements will operate for continuous shift workers in Brisbane 
Youth Detention Centre, Cleveland Youth Detention Centre and West Moreton Youth Detention Centre, 
in accordance with section 15.1(c) Youth Detention Centre Employees Award  State 2016. 
(2) Where continuous shift workers engaged at youth detention centres work 12 hour shift arrangements in 
accordance with section 15.1(c) of the , those 
employees will receive a Consolidated Shift Allowance (CSA). 
(3) The CSA will be paid as a consolidation of the following payments which are provided for in the Youth 
Detention Ce: 
(i) shift allowances incurred for afternoon and night shifts; and 
(ii) penalty payments incurred for shifts on Saturdays and Sundays. 
(4) The CSA will be paid fortnightly in addition to base salary at the following rates: 
(i) 26.96% for continuous shift workers employed at the OO3 and OO4 classification levels; 
(ii) 26.96% for continuous shift workers employed at the OO5 classification level; and 
(iii) 27.46% for continuous shift workers employed at the OO6 classification level. 
(5) The C
clause 19.1(b) of the ), and during Long Service 
Leave. 
(6) The CSA will not be payable on: 
(i) overtime hours worked (relevant Award provisions will instead apply); 
(ii) any hours worked on a public holiday (relevant Award provisions will instead apply); 
(iii) a rostered or scheduled day off, or time off in lieu of overtime (TOIL); and 
(iv) any type of leave other than Recreation Leave and Long Service Leave, unless an industrial 
instrument provides otherwise. 
(7) The CSA will not be included in the calculation of employer superannuation contributions (except where 
required to be included for calculation of Ordinary Time Earnings under the Superannuation Guarantee 
legislation). 
2.10  
(1) Operational employees at classification levels OO2 to OO6 (inclusive) covered by this Agreement will 

experienced by operational employees working with vulnerable young people and/or within a controlled 
youth detention centre environment. Specifically, the complex nature of youth detention centres and the 
===== page =====
 
potential danger to employees due to the changing complexity and challenging nature of young people 
being held within youth detention centres. 
(2) This allowance will be paid at the rate of $4.6553 per ordinary hour worked up to a maximum of $353.80 
per fortnight. 
(3) This allowance will be increased at the same time as the annual base wage increases at clause 2.1 (1) as 
follows: 
(i) 1 August 2024: $4.8415 per ordinary hour worked up to a maximum of $367.95 per fortnight. 
 
(ii) 1 August 2025: $4.9867 per ordinary hour worked up to a maximum of $379.00 per fortnight. 
(4) This allowance will not be payable at any time the employee is not working ordinary hours, unless 
specified in 2.10 (4), including on: 
(i) overtime and time off in lieu of overtime (TOIL); 
(ii) a rostered or scheduled day off; and 
(iii) any type of leave (except annual leave, long service leave and special leave), unless an 
industrial instrument provides otherwise. 
(5) This allowance is payable on annual leave, long service leave and special leave. 
(6) This allowance will be included in the calculation of employer superannuation contributions.  
(7) This allowance is not included as base salary for the purpose of calculating consolidated shift allowance. 
 
2.11 Soiled Linen Allowance 
(1) Employees covered by this Agreement who are employed as OO3 Laundry Supervisors and OO2 
Laundry Assistants will be paid a soiled linen allowance of $0.26316 per ordinary hour worked in 
recognition of the requirement to handle soiled linen in the course of their duties in a youth detention 
centre environment. 
(2) The allowance will not be payable at any time the employee is not working ordinary hours, including 
on: 
(i) overtime and time in lieu of overtime (TOIL); 
(ii) a rostered or scheduled day off; and 
(iii) any type of leave, unless an industrial instrument provides otherwise. 
(3) This allowance will not be included in the calculation of employer superannuation contributions (except 
where required to be included for calculation of Ordinary Time Earnings under the Superannuation 
Guarantee legislation). 
(4)  
 
2.12 Youth Detention Skilled Worker (Retention) Allowance 
(1) Employees covered by this Agreement will be paid as an all-purpose Youth Detention Centre Skilled 
Worker (Retention) Allowance of $45.00 per fortnight  continuous 
===== page =====
 
service excluding any periods of leave without pay not credited as service for the purpose of salary 
increments in the Leave without Salary Credited as Service Directive, as amended). 
(2) The Youth Detention Centre Skilled Worker (Retention) Allowance is an all-purpose allowance and, as 
such, is: 
(i) payable in respect of all work performed and shall be subject to any applicable overtime or 
penalty rates;  
(ii) payable for recreation leave, rostered days off, public holidays, workers' compensation, sick 
leave, long service leave, leave without pay for periods of less than one day; and 
(iii) not payable for leave without pay for periods of one day or more. 
(3)  The allowance is considered part of ordinary time earnings (OTE) for the purposes of superannuation. 
(4)  The allowance is pro-rata for part-time and casual employees. 
(5)  The allowance is not subject to annual increases. 
 
2.13 Cleveland Youth Detention Centre General Employees 
(1) This section applies to employees covered by this Agreement who are employed under the General 
Employees (Queensland Government Departments) and Other Employees Award  State 2015 on a 
permanent  or temporary basis at classification levels OO2 to OO4 (inclusive) at Cleveland Youth 
Detention Centre. 
(2) From the operative date of this Agreement, employees to whom this section applies will receive the 
following entitlements in recognition of their contribution to Cleveland Youth Detention Centre 
operations: 
(i) a locality allowance in accordance with the Directive relating to Locality Allowances (as 
amended). . 
(ii) 
of duty prescribed) for each completed year of service and a proportionate amount for an 
incomplete year of service. Note, this entitlement applies to part-time employees on a pro-rata 
basis. In the case of employees other than continuous shift workers, leave loading will be 
 leave accrual only. However, the employer may, 
at its discretion, choose to pay leave loading (on a pro rata basis) at the rate of 14% on five 

ion leave accrual. 
2.14 Meal Breaks and Rest Pauses 
(1) Shift workers participating in 12 hour shifts shall be entitled to a 30 minute break at the conclusion of 
the school day to be taken away from their designated work area, at a time which suits the convenience 
of the employer and so as not to interfere with the continuity of work. 
(2) Every shift worker participating in 12 hour shifts is entitled to a rest pause of 15 minutes duration in the 
employer's time in the first and second half of the working day. Such rest pauses are to be taken at times to 
suit the convenience of the employer and so as not to interfere with the continuity of work where work is 
necessary. Provided that the employer may determine that the rest pauses may be taken as three 10 minute 
rest pauses or combined into one 30 minute rest pause to be taken during the working day. 
(3) Employees who are required to supervise young people during meal-times shall be provided with meals 
free of charge. 
===== page =====
 
(4) The employer commits to reviewing the timing of paid meal (crib) breaks provided under clause 16.2 of 
the for Detention Youth Workers working 12 hour 
shifts in youth detention centres. This will occur at each youth detention centre separately via 
consultation at Local Consultative Committees (LCCs). 
2.15 Safety, Health and Wellbeing 
(1) The employer is committed to achieving a safe workplace through the development and implementation 
of a safety, health and wellbeing framework, which will: 
(i) be informed by relevant legislation and whole of government agendas; 
(ii) ensure that collaboration, consultation and communication with employees is a fundamental 
principle of the framework; 
(iii) collaboratively work to mitigate and/or manage risk, including physical and psychological risk, 
with an aim of reducing workplace related injuries and/or illness; and 
(iv) provide for continuous improvement through ongoing engagement with employees, 
establishment of a workplace health and safety (WHS) peak committee with oversight of local 
committees, and encouragement of WHS representatives to participate fully. 
(2) Further, the employer undertakes to consult with unions in relation to the content of the safety, health 
and well-being framework, including jointly agreed WHS peak committee terms of reference and 
escalation protocols. 
2.16 Staff to Young Person Ratio 
(1) The parties agree to a minimum staff to young person ratio of 1:4 within youth detention centres and 
further, that only Detention Youth Workers may be counted in the staff component of this ratio. 
(2) The parties recognise that from time to time Section Supervisors may be called upon to assist in genuine 
short term backfill of Detention Youth Workers throughout the course of shifts where emergent or 
extenuating circumstances present. 
(3) The parties recognise that any extension of this arrangement to new youth detention centre infrastructure 
is subject to appropriate funding allocation and its applicability to approved operating models from 
Government. 
2.17 Hepatitis Vaccinations 
(1) The employer will meet the cost of Hepatitis A and B vaccinations for all youth detention centre 
employees who choose to be vaccinated. 
2.18 No Further Claims 
(1) This Agreement is in full and final 
Agreement that no party will pursue any extra claims relating to wages or conditions of employment 
whether dealt with in this Agreement or not. 
(2) Subject to clause 2.19(3) herein, this Agreement covers all matters or claims that could otherwise be 
subject to protected industrial action. 
(3) 
Agreement: 
(a) General Rulings and Statements of Policy issued by the Commission that provide conditions 
that are not less favourable than current conditions; 
===== page =====
 
(b) Any improvements in conditions that are determined on a whole-of-government basis; and 
(c) Reclassifications. 
(4) Unless inconsistent with the terms of this Agreement, the entitlement of employees covered by this 
Agreement as contained in awards, certified agreements, Commission orders, determinations or 
directives made, or continued, under the Public Sector Act 2022 effective at the date this Agreement 
operates from shall not be reduced for the life of this Agreement. 
(5) Any increases in monetary amounts or other entitlements as a result of Commission decisions or 
Directives made under the Public Sector Act 2022 will be applied. 
(6) It is a term of this Agreement that no person covered by this Agreement will receive a rate of pay 
which is less than the corresponding rate of pay in the relevant parent award. 
PART 3: TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT 
(1) The employer commits to provide youth detention operational staff with five (5) days paid training per 
year for mandatory competencies, along with assessment to ascertain whether these competencies are 
achieved each year. 
(2) Additional training and development will be provided to youth detention operational staff in relation to 
working with clients with mental health, alcohol and drug misuse issues, as well as other training as 

block training modules, online course material and/or on the job coaching or mentoring. 
(3) Youth detention operational staff who seek to undertake study to obtain an accredited qualification which 

and Research Assistance Scheme. 
(4) The parties agree to jointly develop an ongoing professional development and training framework to 
ensure continuous enhancements to the current framework and ongoing competency of frontline youth 
detention centre employees.  
(5) The parties agree to implement the professional development and training framework over the life of 
this Agreement to ensure that employees are appropriately qualified and the new workforce 
professionalised to meet the changing needs and complexity of clients. 
PART 4: RECOGNITION OF ACCREDITED QUALIFICATIONS 
4.1 Commitment 
(1) The parties are committed to the principle that financial recompense will be provided for public sector 
employees in the specified classifications who meet the following requirements: 
(a) an accredited qualification at the AQF level specified, or higher, achieved through training and 
assessment of competencies (including recognition of current competencies); and 
(b) reached the maximum paypoint of the specified classification level in the Administration 
Stream or the Operational Stream; and 
(c) spent one calendar year on the maximum pay point (or, in the case of casual employees, have 
spent one calendar year and worked 1200 hours at the maximum pay point). 
4.2 Appropriate Remuneration 
(1) The following remuneration shall be paid for employees that meet the requirements in clause 4.1: 
===== page =====
 
Certificate IV (AQF IV) AO2 $41.50 per fortnight 
Diploma (AQF V) AO3 $42.80 per fortnight 
Advanced Diploma (AQF VI) AO4        $44.60 per fortnight 
Certificate III (AQF III) OO2 $20.00 per fortnight 
Certificate IV (AQF IV) OO3 $41.50 per fortnight 
Diploma (AQF V) OO4/OO5 $42.80 per fortnight 
Advanced Diploma (AQF VI)    OO6 $44.60 per fortnight 
PART 5: CULTURAL AWARENESS AND LEAVE 
(1) The parties recognise the value of diversity in the workplace and the importance of measures that 
promote diversity and cultural respect, in particular with regard to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
peoples and cultures. 
(2) Employees may access up to 5 days unpaid cultural leave per year as prescribed at section 51 of the 
Industrial Relations Act 2016. In addition, eligible employees may also access cultural leave: 
 as recreation leave; 
 as unpaid special leave; 
 in lieu of public holidays (where operational circumstances permit); 
 as accrued time leave; or 
 at the required time with such time made up at a later date. 
(3) The employer will report to the relevant CC about cultural awareness training and activities.  
PART 6: PAID PARENTAL LEAVE 
(1) Notwithstanding the federal paid parental leave scheme the current paid parental leave provisions 
provided by the employer as at the date of operation of this Agreement will not be reduced for the life 
of this Agreement. 
PART 7: EMPLOYMENT SECURITY AND PERMANENT EMPLOYMENT 
7.1 Employment Security 
(1) The Government is committed to maximum employment security in accordance with Appendix 3 of this 
Agreement for permanent  employees by developing and maintaining a responsive, impartial and 
efficient public service as the preferred provider of existing services to Government and the community. 
7.2 Permanent Employment 
(1) The parties are committed to maximising permanent employment where possible. Casual or temporary 
forms of employment or labour hire should only be utilised where permanent employment is not viable 
or appropriate. The employer is encouraged to proactively utilise workforce planning and management 
strategies to assist in determining the appropriate workforce mix for current and future needs. In 
particular, the future of work should be at the forefront of employer considerations in workforce planning 
and recruitment. The employer should review current and future capability requirements and funding 
availability and projections ahead of advertising roles with a view to maximising permanent 
employment. 
(2) The employer commits to using its best endeavours to ensure that should labour hire workers be engaged, 
such engagement occurs in a manner which minimises the impact upon the employment security of the 
employment of existing employees. 
===== page =====
 
 
7.3  Temporary Employment 
(1) The employer commits, where possible, to collect additional data about temporary engagements with a 
view to increasing reporting to the ACC or relevant CC on a quarterly basis about the number of 
temporary engagements and the categorie
 
(2) The employer acknowledges eligible fixed term temporary employees may request a review of status 
after one year of continuous employment in accordance with section 113 of the Public Sector Act 2022 
in which an employer must review the status of eligible fixed term temporary employees after two years 
of continuous employment. The decision maker criteria for reviews is provided for in the Public Sector 
Act 2022 and the Directive relating to review of non-permanent employment. Further, the employer will 
endeavour to provide greater communication to affected employees about possibilities for extension to 
or termination for temporary contracts. Where practicable, the employer will communicate with affected 
employees as soon as possible where the possibility or extension or non-extension arises and will keep 
the affected employee appraised of relevant developments. 
(3) nent employment, the 
employer will endeavour to maximise part-time hours for permanent part-time employees where 
possible. 
7.4 Organisational Change and Restructuring 
(1) The Government is committed to providing stability  by limiting organisational restructuring and 
contracting-out of services. 
(2) Employment Security and the 
Contracting-Out of Government Services (contained at Appendices 3 and 4 of this Agreement). Without 
limiting or enhancing the existing policies, the employer acknowledges that where operational decisions 
or contracting out of services decisions result in organisational change or restructure, the policies provide 
for: 
 the need to demonstrate clear benefits and enhanced service delivery to the community; 
 avoid unnecessary change that will not deliver demonstrable benefit to the Government or the 
community; 
 Cabinet approval is required for all major organisational change and restructuring in entities in 
accordance with the considerations outlined in the policies; 
 where the employer has made a decision to introduce major organisational change or restructuring, 
it will notify affected employees/unions and discuss the changes as early as practicable. This may 
be undertaken through the ACC or relevant CC forums; 
 Cabinet approval for contracting-out proposals that meet specified criteria including significant 
 
(3) The employer shall provide in writing to the members of the ACC or the relevant CC of their intention 
to implement organisational changes that may affect the employment security of employees, prior to the 
commencement of any planned changes. This shall include all information required to be provided in 

employer is also required where requested to provide relevant unions with a listing of the affected staff 
comprising name, job title and work location. 
===== page =====
 
(4) It is acknowledged that management has a right to implement changes to ensure the effective delivery 
of public services. The consultation process will not be used to frustrate or delay the changes but rather 
ensure that all viable options are considered. If this process cannot be resolved at the relevant CC in a 
timely manner either party may refer the matter to the ACC for resolution. 
(5) The parties agree that the employer should report to unions on a quarterly basis the current status of 
employment practices within the department. This report should be provided on a quarterly basis at the 
ACC. Specifically, the report should detail the following: 
(a) a snapshot of the current workforce including the total number of employees, the number of 
employees by appointment type (permanent, temporary and casual), stream allocation; 
(b) a report on the variance from the previous quarter in the use of casuals, temporaries and the 
number of people engaged through labour hire; 
(c) the number of people engaged through labour hire; 
(d) any significant variance in the number of permanent employees; 
(e) the conversion of temporary employees to permanent status. 
(6) Permanent employees will not be forced into unemployment as a result of organisational change or 
changes in the priorities of the employer. Where changes to employment arrangements are necessary, 
there will be active pursuit of retraining and alternative placement opportunities. There is a responsibility 
on the employee to meaningfully participate in the opportunities made available. The employer and 
employees will comply with all relevant directives (as amended). Where an employee refuses to 
participate or cooperate in these processes, the full provisions of the directive pertaining to retrenchment 
may be followed to the extent of their applicability. 
(7) Provisions and entitlements relating to organisational change and restructuring can be found in the 
directives relating to early retirement, redundancy and retrenchment (as amended) which will apply for 
the life of this Agreement. 
(8) The employer must provide relevant information to the relevant union/s when it intends to apply the 
provisions of the directive (as amended) relating to early retirement, redundancy and retrenchment where 
an employee may be genuinely redundant or is to possibly be retrenched. Such information must be 


employee sufficient to allow the employee to seek relevant independent advice. 
(9) The parties recognise the cultural diversity, rights, views and expectations of Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander peoples in the delivery of culturally appropriate services and that additional consultation may be 
required if changes to these services are proposed to ensure there is a community benefit. 
PART 8: SALARY PACKAGING 
(1) Salary packaging is available for employees (excluding short-term casual employees) covered by this 
Agreement in accordance with Government policy found in the Circular issued from time to time by the 
entity responsible. 
(2) The employer is to apply the following principles for employees that avail themselves of salary 
packaging: 
(a) as part of the salary package arrangements, the costs for administering the package, including 
fringe benefits tax, are met by the participating employee; 
===== page =====
 
(b) there will be no additional increase in superannuation costs or to fringe benefits payments made 
by the employer; 
(c) increases or variations in taxation are to be passed to employees as part of their salary package; 
(d) where mandated by relevant Government policies, employees must obtain independent 
financial advice prior to taking up a salary package. Where no mandatory requirement exists, it 
is strongly recommended to all employees to seek independent financial advice when entering 
into a salary packaging arrangement for the first time, or adding new item/items to an already 
agreed packaging arrangement; 
(e) the employer will pass on to the employee any Input Tax Credits (ITCs) it receives as part of 
salary packaging; 
(f) there will be no significant additional administrative workload or other ongoing costs to the 
employer; 
(g) any additional administrative and fringe benefit tax costs are to be met by the employee; 
(h) any increases or variations to taxation, excluding payroll tax that result in additional costs are to 
be passed on to the employee as part of the salary package. 
(3) The employee's salary for superannuation purposes and severance and termination payments will be the 
gross salary, which the employee would receive if not taking part in flexible remuneration packaging. 
(4) Subject to federal legislation, employees may elect to adjust their current salary sacrifice arrangements 
to sacrifice up to 100% of salary to superannuation. 
PART 9: CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEES 
(1) The parties agree that employees should be consulted about decisions which may affect their 
employment or welfare, and that meaningful consultation with affected employees leads to improved 
organisational outcomes. 
(2) In recognition of clause 9(1), the employer will have a joint union/employer ACC. The ACC will be 
used to facilitate consultation on a broad range of issues, including but not limited to discussion of 
matters arising from this Agreement such as: 
(a) Workload Management (Part 16); 
(b) Organisational Change and Restructuring (Part 7.4); 
(c) Training (Part 3); 
(d) Union Encouragement (Part 12); 
(e) Work/Life Balance (Part 20); 
(f) Organisational matters such as the review of, changes to or introduction of new workforce 
management policies; 
(g) Fair Career Paths (Part 17); 
(h) Improving Gender Equity (Part 19); and 
(i) Cultural Awareness activities and training (Part 5). 
(3) The ACC may agree to establish standing committees, sub-committees, or other additional consultative 
structures (such as local CCs) with terms of reference agreed between the parties. 
===== page =====
 
(4) CC forums will allow for consultation, engagement and dispute resolution directly between affected 
employees (through their union delegates to the committee/forum) and the relevant decision-makers. 
(5) The employer will review and update (if required), in consultation with the relevant unions, a framework 
for the conduct of consultation within the employer within six months of the date of operation of this 
Agreement. This framework should take into account the organisational structure of the employer, the 
different parties that should be involved in consultative processes, and the interaction between various 
consultative mechanisms, including the provision of data (consisting of employee name, job title, work 
location (including floor level where possible), anticipated effect, rationale for change and potential 
timeframes) where relevant. 
(6) This Agreement, through various provisions, allocates a number of roles and responsibilities to the ACC 
and CCs which the employer will ensure occurs in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement and 
e parties to this Agreement agree to review and update (if 
required) the Terms of Reference template for the ACC/CCs within six months of the date of certification 
of this Agreement. 
PART 10: COLLECTIVE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS 
(1) The Government acknowledges that structured, collective industrial relations will continue as a 
fundamental principle of the management of entities. The principle recognises the important role of 
unions and the traditionally high levels of union membership. It supports constructive relations between 
management and unions and recognises the need to work collaboratively with relevant unions and 
employees in an open and accountable way. 
(2) The Government as an employer recognises that union membership and coverage issues are determined 
by the provisions of the Industrial Relations Act 2016 and any determinations of the Commission. 
(3) The Government is committed to collective agreements and will not support non-union agreements. 
PART 11: ILO CONVENTIONS 
(1) The Government as an employer recognises its obligations to give effect to international labour standards 

opportunity for all employees. 
PART 12: UNION ENCOURAGEMENT 
(1) 
commitment, recognises the right of individuals to join a union and will encourage that membership. 
However, it is also recognised that union membership remains at the discretion of individuals. 
(2) An application for union membership and information on the relevant union/s will be provided to all 
employees at the point of engagement. 
(3) Information on the relevant union(s) will be included in induction materials. 
(4) Union representative(s) will be provided with the opportunity to discuss union membership with new 
employees. 
(5) The employer is encouraged to agree to local arrangements about union and delegate rights in the 
workplace. 
(6) The employer is to provide relevant unions with complete lists of new starters (consisting of name, job 
title, work email, work location (including floor level where possible), award and employment status 
(permanent/temporary/casual)) to the workplace on a quarterly basis, unless agreed between the 
employer and union to be on a more regular basis. This information is to be provided electronically. 
===== page =====
 
(7) The employer is also required where requested to provide relevant unions with a listing of current staff 
comprising name, job title, work email, work location (including floor level where possible), award and 
employment status (permanent/temporary/casual)). This information shall be supplied on a six monthly 
basis, unless agreed between the employer and union to be on a more regular basis. The provision of all 
staff information to relevant unions shall be consistent with the principles outlined at section 350 of the 
Industrial Relations Act 2016. This information is to be provided electronically. 
(8) The employer is to provide relevant unions with complete lists of employment separations (consisting 
of name, job title, work location, award and employment status (permanent/temporary/casual) to the 
workplace on a quarterly basis, unless agreed between the employer and union to be on a more regular 
basis. This information is to be provided electronically. 
PART 13: UNION DELEGATES 
(1) 
commitment, acknowledges the constructive role democratically elected union delegates undertake in 
the workplace in relation to union activities that support and assist members. That role will be formally 
recognised, accepted and supported. 
(2) Employees will be given full access to union delegates/officials during working hours to discuss any 
employment matter or seek union advice, provided that service delivery is not disrupted and work 
requirements are not unduly affected. 
(3) Provided that service delivery and work requirements are not unduly affected, delegates will be provided 
convenient access to facilities for the purpose of undertaking union activities. Such facilities include: 
telephones, computers, e-mail, photocopiers, facsimile machines, storage facilities, meeting rooms and 
notice boards. It is expected that management and delegates will take a reasonable approach to the 
responsible use of such facilities for information and communication purposes. 
(4) legates may 
 
PART 14: INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS EDUCATION LEAVE 
(1) Industrial relations education leave is paid time off to acquire industrial relations knowledge and 
competencies which deve
perform a representative role and further the effective operation of grievance and dispute settlement 
procedures. 
(2) Before the employer approves such leave the union must provide the employer information about the 
course content, the times at which the courses will be offered, the numbers of attendees, and the types 
of employees at whom the course is targeted. Before approving leave, the employer must be satisfied 
that the proposed course is within the terms of clause 14(1). 
(3) Employees may be granted up to 5 working days (or the equivalent hours) paid time off (noncumulative) 
per calendar year to attend industrial relations education sessions, approved by the chief executive (or 
delegated authority) of the employer. 
(4) Additional leave, over and above 5 working days non-cumulative (or the equivalent hours) in any one 

5 working days (or the equivalent). Such leave will be subject to consultation between the chief executive 
(or delegated authority) of the employer, the relevant union and the employee. 
(5) Upon request and subject to approval by the chief executive (or delegated authority) of the employer, 
employees may be granted paid time off in special circumstances to attend Management Committee 
Meetings, Union Conferences, and Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU) Congress. 
===== page =====
 
(6) The granting of industrial relations education leave or any additional leave should not impact adversely 
on service delivery, work requirements or the effectiveness and efficiency of the entity/work unit 
concerned. At the same time such leave shall not be unreasonably refused. 
(7) At the discretion of the chief executive of the employer, employees may be granted special leave without 
pay to undertake work with their union. Such leave will be in accordance with the Directive relating to 
 (as amended) in relation to special leave without salary. Conditions outlined in this 
 
PART 15: PREVENTION AND SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES 
(1) The objectives of this procedure are the avoidance and resolution of any disputes over matters covered 
by this Agreement, by measures based on the provision of information and explanation, consultation, 
co-operation and negotiation. 
(2) Subject to legislation, while the dispute procedure is being followed, normal work is to continue except 

The status quo existing before the emergence of a dispute is to continue whilst the procedure is being 
followed. No party shall be prejudiced as to the final settlement by the continuation of work. 
(3) There is a requirement for management to provide relevant information and explanation and consult with 
the appropriate employee representatives. 
(4) In the event of any disagreement between the parties as to the interpretation or implementation of this 
Agreement, the following procedures shall apply: 
(a) 
concerned (where appropriate) and the immediate supervisor in the first instance. The 
discussion should take place within 24 hours and the procedure should not extend beyond 7 
days. 
(b) If the matter is not resolved as per (a) above, it shall be referred by the union representative 
and/or the employee(s) to the appropriate management representative who shall arrange a 
conference of the parties to discuss the matter. This process should not extend beyond 7 days. 
(c) If the matter remains unresolved it may be referred by the employee and/or his/her union 
representative to the ACC for discussion and appropriate action. This process should not exceed 
14 days. 
(d) If the matter is not resolved then it may be referred by either party to the Commission for 
conciliation, or if necessary, arbitration. 
(5) Nothing contained in this procedure shall prevent unions or the employer from intervening in respect of 
matters in dispute, should such action be considered conducive to achieving resolution. 
(6) The parties acknowledge that, for matters not covered by this Agreement, there are other dispute 
resolution procedures available. 
PART 16: WORKLOAD MANAGEMENT 
(1) The employer is committed to working with its employees and relevant unions to address workload 
management issues. It is acknowledged that high workloads can in some circumstances lead to unsafe 
work practices, therefore the employer should ensure safe work environments are not compromised, and 
that employer responsibilities under legislation including duty of care to all employees are complied 
with. 
===== page =====
 
(2) It is recognised by the employer that unrealistic expectations should not be placed on employees by line 
management to consistently perform excessive working hours whereby no opportunities arise to utilise 
accrued time or time off in lieu (TOIL). 
(3) The employer is obliged to consider the impacts on workloads when organisational change occurs, 
particularly those impacts arising from the introduction of new programs and from machinery of 
government changes. Management at the local level should undertake appropriate consultation with 
affected employees when implementing organisational initiatives including machinery of government 
changes that may have an impact on the workloads of affected employees. 
(4) The parties note that the Queensland Government workload management tool has been developed to 
assist managers and employees. In utilising the workload management tool, the employer is obliged to 
adapt the template tool to account for employer-specific circumstances to ensure easier application of 
the tool. 
(5) In addition, the parties agree that relevant CCs will deal with the issue of workload management. The 
activities of the CC in the area of workload management should include, but not be limited to, the 
following: 
(a) To undertake research on local workload management issues; 
(b) To address specific workload issues referred by staff of work units, union officials and/or 
management; 
(c) To develop expedient processes for referral of workload issues to the CC; 
(d) Based on research, develop strategies to improve immediate and long term workload issues; 
(e) To assess the implications of workloads from a workplace health and safety perspective and 
refer relevant matters to the workplace health and safety committee; 
(f) To consider the impacts on workloads when organisational change occurs, particularly those 
impacts arising from the introduction of new programs and from machinery of government 
changes, and make recommendations to affected workgroups on the management of potential 
workload issues where appropriate. 
PART 17: FAIR CAREER PATHS 
17.1 General Provisions 
(1) The employer acknowledges that absences from the workforce due to family responsibilities and 
utilisation of flexibility measurers should not be considered barriers to progression. 
(2) The employer will report to the relevant CC on measures taken to support improved career paths. 
(3) The parties are committed to providing reasonable career opportunities to employees. The parties are 
committed to providing consistent and transparent classifications across the employer. 
(4) The employer, in consultation with the relevant CC, will ensure that it has a review process in place to 
allow aggrieved employees the opportunity to raise concerns about the work value assessment (utilising 
the job evaluation management system (JEMS) or other approved methodology) of their position. These 
processes will provide the opportunity for consultation with the relevant union and may include a union 
representative as part of the process. 
(5) Design Principles relating to the JEMS review process were approved by the Central Peak Consultative 
Committee in 2004 under the auspices of the State Government Departments Certified Agreement 2003. 
These agreed Design Principles were developed and approved for discretionary use by Government 
entities, including the employer, when finalising the review process referred to above. 
===== page =====
 
17.2 Improving Internal  Career Paths 
(1) The parties reaffirm their commitment to  career paths based on merit and for equity and diversity, and 
the importance of selecting the applicant best suited to the position, consistent with the Public Sector 
Act 2022. 
PART 18: FAIR TREATMENT AT WORK 
(1) The parties commit to continue to work to improve performance management practices. 
PART 19: IMPROVING GENDER EQUITY 
(1) The parties are committed to improving gender equity, to achieve fair and equal outcomes.  
(2) The parties acknowledge the importance of ensuring recruitment processes and practices consistent with 
the Public Sector Act 2022 (where applicable), noting obligations with respect to equity, diversity, 
respect and inclusion principles are inclusive. 
(3) The parties acknowledge the benefits of flexibility in the workplace and the employer is committed to 
supporting flexibility and gender equity in accordance with its legislative obligations. 
(4) The parties agree that cultural change is necessary to ensure flexible work arrangements are not 
perceived to be gender related and do not result in unintended consequences. 
(5) The parties are committed to driving cultural change with specific emphasis on the promotion of and 
availability of flexibility measures for all employees irrespective of gender. 
(6) The employer confirms its commitment to supporting women in the workplace and recognising the 
importance of gender pay equity. 
(7) The parties acknowledge that cultural change is necessary to ensure that the gender pay gap is reduced 
during the life of this Agreement. 
(8) Where requested by the union/s the parties commit to establish an Equal Employment Opportunity 
Subcommittee of the ACC, to promote cultural change and support flexibility and gender equity in the 
workplace. 
PART 20: WORK/LIFE BALANCE 
(1) The employer is committed to workplace practices that improve the balance between work and life for 
its employees and provide, irrespective of gender. 
(2) The parties agree that requests by employees to access work-life balance initiatives will be considered. 
Work-life balance initiatives shall include, but not be limited to: 
 Flexible working arrangements, including telecommuting/working from home and co-working 
spaces/distributed work centres; 
 Secondments and interchanges; 
 Career breaks; and 
 Transition to retirement. 
(3) The employer acknowledges an employees entitlements to request flexible work arrangements in 
accordance with the Industrial Relations Act 2016 and its obligations in deciding those requests on an 
individual basis. 
===== page =====
 
PART 21: WORKPLACE BULLYING 
(1) All employees have the right to be treated fairly and with dignity in an environment free from disruption, 
intimidation, harassment, victimisation and discrimination. 
(2) The employer commits to raise further awareness of the protections for employees from bullying and 
harassment as provided under the Industrial Relations Act 2016. 
PART 22: SUPPORT FOR WORKERS WITH MENTAL ILLNESS 
(1) The parties recognise that the workplace plays a vital role in assisting employees affected by mental 
health issues and commits to: 
(a) fostering communication and openness to mental health issues to reduce any stigma or barriers 
which may impact on employees seeking support; and 
(b) fostering a respectful, empathetic and inclusive work environment to assist and support to 
employees. 
 
PART 23: BEHAVIOUR MANAGEMENT MODEL FOR YOUNG PEOPLE IN YOUTH DETENTION 
CENTRES 
(1) The employer recognises that violence and aggression by young people towards staff is not acceptable 
and undertakes to communicate this position within the youth detention centres. 
(2) The parties agree to maintain the existing Behaviour and Incentives model currently in operation in youth 
detention centres. The employer will ensure that appropriate consequences for the continuum of 
misbehaviour that young people present are consistent with the existing model, which is informed by the 
Youth Justice Act 1991, Youth Justice Regulation 2016 and departmental documents. 
(3) The parties agree to undertake regular joint reviews of the efficacy of the existing model in managing 
the behaviour of young people and undertake necessary amendments or refinements as required. 
===== page =====
 
APPENDIX 1: SALARY SCHEDULES 
INDEX OF CONTENTS OF APPENDIX 1: 
 General Employees (Queensland Government Departments) and Other Employees Award  State 2015; 
 Youth Detention Centre Employees Award - State 2016. 
===== page =====
 
 
General Employees (Queensland Government Departments) and Other Employees Award  State 2015    
 
ADMINISTRATIVE STREAM 
 
Classification Pay Salary 01/08/2023 Salary 01/08/2024 Salary 01/08/2025 Salary 01/08/2023 Salary 01/08/2024 Salary 01/08/2025 
Level  Point  Per Fortnight (4% Per Fortnight (4% Per Fortnight (3% Annualised (4% p.a. Annualised (4% p.a. Annualised (3% p.a. 
p.a. increase)  p.a. increase)  p.a. increase)  increase)  increase)  increase)  
L1  1  $1,718.10  $1,786.80  $1,840.40  $44,824  $46,616  $48,015  
 2  $1,804.30  $1,876.50  $1,932.80  $47,073  $48,957  $50,425  
L2 3  $1,911.70  $1,988.20  $2,047.80  $49,875  $51,871  $53,426  
 1  $2,148.20  $2,234.10  $2,301.10  $56,045  $58,286  $60,034  
 2  $2,201.90  $2,290.00  $2,358.70  $57,446  $59,744  $61,537  
 3  $2,257.90  $2,348.20  $2,418.60  $58,907  $61,263  $63,100  
 4  $2,315.00  $2,407.60  $2,479.80  $60,397  $62,813  $64,696  
 5  $2,369.80  $2,464.60  $2,538.50  $61,826  $64,300  $66,228  
 6  $2,426.90  $2,524.00  $2,599.70  $63,316  $65,849  $67,824  
 7  $2,488.60  $2,588.10  $2,665.70  $64,926  $67,522  $69,546  
 8  $2,558.00  $2,660.30  $2,740.10  $66,736  $69,405  $71,487  
L3 1  $2,727.20  $2,836.30  $2,921.40  $71,151  $73,997  $76,217  
 2  $2,825.80  $2,938.80  $3,027.00  $73,723  $76,671  $78,972  
 3  $2,927.70  $3,044.80  $3,136.10  $76,382  $79,437  $81,819  
 4  $3,026.20  $3,147.20  $3,241.60  $78,951  $82,108  $84,571  
L4 1  $3,203.10  $3,331.20  $3,431.10  $83,567  $86,909  $89,515  
 2  $3,305.00  $3,437.20  $3,540.30  $86,225  $89,674  $92,364  
 3  $3,409.20  $3,545.60  $3,652.00  $88,944  $92,502  $95,278  
 4  $3,512.30  $3,652.80  $3,762.40  $91,633  $95,299  $98,158  
L5 1  $3,693.70  $3,841.40  $3,956.60  $96,366  $100,219  $103,225  
 2  $3,797.90  $3,949.80  $4,068.30  $99,084  $103,047  $106,139  
 3  $3,903.00  $4,059.10  $4,180.90  $101,826  $105,899  $109,077  
 4  $4,006.20  $4,166.40  $4,291.40  $104,519  $108,698  $111,960  
L6 1  $4,224.60  $4,393.60  $4,525.40  $110,217  $114,626  $118,064  
 2  $4,319.60  $4,492.40  $4,627.20  $112,695  $117,204  $120,720  
 3  $4,416.00  $4,592.60  $4,730.40  $115,210  $119,818  $123,413  
 4  $4,511.20  $4,691.60  $4,832.30  $117,694  $122,400  $126,071  
L7 1  $4,711.70  $4,900.20  $5,047.20  $122,925  $127,843  $131,678  
 2  $4,824.90  $5,017.90  $5,168.40  $125,878  $130,913  $134,840  
 3  $4,935.70  $5,133.10  $5,287.10  $128,769  $133,919  $137,937  
 4  $5,045.40  $5,247.20  $5,404.60  $131,631  $136,896  $141,002  
L8  1  $5,210.10  $5,418.50  $5,581.10  $135,928  $141,365  $145,607  
 2  $5,311.00  $5,523.40  $5,689.10  $138,560  $144,102  $148,425  
 3  $5,407.20  $5,623.50  $5,792.20  $141,070  $146,713  $151,114  
 4  $5,505.80  $5,726.00  $5,897.80  $143,642  $149,387  $153,869  
 
  
===== page =====
 
 
General Employees (Queensland Government Departments) and Other Employees Award  State 2015    
 
OPERATIONAL STREAM 
 
Classification Pay Point  Salary 01/08/2023 Salary 01/08/2024 Salary 01/08/2025 Salary 01/08/2023 Salary 01/08/2024 Salary 01/08/2025 
Level  Per Fortnight (4% Per Fortnight (4% Per Fortnight (3% Annualised (4% Annualised (4% Annualised (3% 
p.a. increase)  p.a. increase)  p.a. increase)  p.a. increase)  p.a. increase)  p.a. increase)  
L1  1  $1,525.50  $1,586.50  $1,634.10  $39,799  $41,391  $42,633  
 
 2  $1,633.00  $1,698.30  $1,749.20  $42,604  $44,307  $45,635  
 3  $1,761.70  $1,832.20  $1,887.20  $45,961  $47,801  $49,236  
 4  $1,869.20  $1,944.00  $2,002.30  $48,766  $50,718  $52,239  
 5  $1,998.00  $2,077.90  $2,140.20  $52,126  $54,211  $55,836  
 6  $2,105.60  $2,189.80  $2,255.50  $54,934  $57,130  $58,844  
L2 1  $2,148.20  $2,234.10  $2,301.10  $56,045  $58,286  $60,034  
 2  $2,205.20  $2,293.40  $2,362.20  $57,532  $59,833  $61,628  
 3  $2,264.60  $2,355.20  $2,425.90  $59,082  $61,445  $63,290  
 4  $2,321.60  $2,414.50  $2,486.90  $60,569  $62,993  $64,881  
L3 1  $2,356.40  $2,450.70  $2,524.20  $61,477  $63,937  $65,855  
 2  $2,402.30  $2,498.40  $2,573.40  $62,674  $65,181  $67,138  
 3  $2,452.70  $2,550.80  $2,627.30  $63,989  $66,549  $68,544  
 4  $2,503.20  $2,603.30  $2,681.40  $65,307  $67,918  $69,956  
L4 1  $2,604.00  $2,708.20  $2,789.40  $67,936  $70,655  $72,773  
 2  $2,685.80  $2,793.20  $2,877.00  $70,071  $72,873  $75,059  
 3  $2,769.70  $2,880.50  $2,966.90  $72,259  $75,150  $77,404  
 4  $2,849.20  $2,963.20  $3,052.10  $74,334  $77,308  $79,627  
L5 1  $2,922.00  $3,038.90  $3,130.10  $76,233  $79,283  $81,662  
 2  $3,013.90  $3,134.50  $3,228.50  $78,630  $81,777  $84,229  
 3  $3,111.40  $3,235.90  $3,333.00  $81,174  $84,422  $86,956  
 4  $3,203.10  $3,331.20  $3,431.10  $83,567  $86,909  $89,515  
L6 1  $3,337.60  $3,471.10  $3,575.20  $87,076  $90,559  $93,274  
 2  $3,427.10  $3,564.20  $3,671.10  $89,411  $92,987  $95,776  
 3  $3,512.30  $3,652.80  $3,762.40  $91,633  $95,299  $98,158  
L7 1  $3,675.80  $3,822.80  $3,937.50  $95,899  $99,734  $102,727  
 2  $3,762.00  $3,912.50  $4,029.90  $98,148  $102,074  $105,137  
 3  $3,849.40  $4,003.40  $4,123.50  $100,428  $104,446  $107,579  
 
  
===== page =====
 
Youth Detention Centre Employees Award  State 2016   
OPERATIONAL STREAM 
 
Classification Pay Point  Salary 01/08/2023 Salary 01/08/2024 Salary 01/08/2025 Salary 01/08/2023 Salary 01/08/2024 Salary 01/08/2025 
Level  Per Fortnight (4% Per Fortnight (4% Per Fortnight (3% Annualised (4% Annualised (4% Annualised (3% 
p.a. increase)  p.a. increase)  p.a. increase)  p.a. increase)  p.a. increase)  p.a. increase)  
L1  1  $1,525.50  $1,586.50  $1,634.10  $39,799  $41,391  $42,633  
 
 2  $1,633.00  $1,698.30  $1,749.20  $42,604  $44,307  $45,635  
 3  $1,761.70  $1,832.20  $1,887.20  $45,961  $47,801  $49,236  
 4  $1,869.20  $1,944.00  $2,002.30  $48,766  $50,718  $52,239  
 5  $1,998.00  $2,077.90  $2,140.20  $52,126  $54,211  $55,836  
 6  $2,105.60  $2,189.80  $2,255.50  $54,934  $57,130  $58,844  
L2 1  $2,148.20  $2,234.10  $2,301.10  $56,045  $58,286  $60,034  
 2  $2,205.20  $2,293.40  $2,362.20  $57,532  $59,833  $61,628  
 3  $2,264.60  $2,355.20  $2,425.90  $59,082  $61,445  $63,290  
 4  $2,321.60  $2,414.50  $2,486.90  $60,569  $62,993  $64,881  
L3 1  $2,356.40  $2,450.70  $2,524.20  $61,477  $63,937  $65,855  
 2  $2,402.30  $2,498.40  $2,573.40  $62,674  $65,181  $67,138  
 3  $2,452.70  $2,550.80  $2,627.30  $63,989  $66,549  $68,544  
 4  $2,503.20  $2,603.30  $2,681.40  $65,307  $67,918  $69,956  
L4 1  $2,604.00  $2,708.20  $2,789.40  $67,936  $70,655  $72,773  
 2  $2,685.80  $2,793.20  $2,877.00  $70,071  $72,873  $75,059  
 3  $2,769.70  $2,880.50  $2,966.90  $72,259  $75,150  $77,404  
 4  $2,849.20  $2,963.20  $3,052.10  $74,334  $77,308  $79,627  
L5 1  $2,922.00  $3,038.90  $3,130.10  $76,233  $79,283  $81,662  
 2  $3,013.90  $3,134.50  $3,228.50  $78,630  $81,777  $84,229  
 3  $3,111.40  $3,235.90  $3,333.00  $81,174  $84,422  $86,956  
 4  $3,203.10  $3,331.20  $3,431.10  $83,567  $86,909  $89,515  
L6 1  $3,337.60  $3,471.10  $3,575.20  $87,076  $90,559  $93,274  
 2  $3,427.10  $3,564.20  $3,671.10  $89,411  $92,987  $95,776  
 3  $3,512.30  $3,652.80  $3,762.40  $91,633  $95,299  $98,158  
 
===== page =====
 
 
APPENDIX 2: LOCALITY ALLOWANCE AREAS  
LOCAL AUTHORITIES AS AT 1997 
Douglas Shire  
Cairns City 
Johnstone Shire  
Cardwell Shire  
Hinchinbrook Shire 
Thuringowa City 
Townsville City  
Burdekin Shire  
Bowen Shire *  
Whitsunday Shire 
Mackay City  
Mirani Shire  
Sarina Shire  
Broadsound Shire * 
Livingstone Shire 
Rockhampton City 
Fitzroy Shire  
Gladstone City  
Calliope Shire  
Miriam Vale Shire 

following: 
Broadsound Bowen 
St Lawrence Collinsville 
Koumala Abbot Point 
Carmila Bowen 
Westwood Armuna 
Binbee 
Almoola 
Scottville 
Wilmington 
Guthalungra 
Kyburra 
Places for which the additional locality allowance available under this Agreement will be paid include the 
following: 
Broadsound Bowen 
Middlemount Ravenswood 
Norwich Park Birralee 
Dysart Mt Leyston 
Saraji Gunjulla 
German Creek Mt Coolon 
===== page =====
 
For any places not listed which are within the local government areas of Broadsound and Bowen, and for which a 
Locality Allowance is payable as set out in Ministerial Directive 19/99 (Locality Allowances), the Chief Executive 
 
===== page =====
 
APPENDIX 3: EMPLOYMENT SECURITY POLICY 
1. Introduction 
The Queensland Government has restored this employment security policy for government agencies as 
part of its commitment to restoring fairness for its workforce. 
1
The Government is committed to maximum employment security for permanent government employees 
(as outlined in section 2  Application) by developing and maintaining a responsive, impartial and efficient 
government workforce as the preferred provider of existing services to Government and the community. 
The w
makes this commitment possible. 
The Government is also committed to providing stability to the government workforce by curbing 
organisational restructuring. The focus will be on pursuing performance improvement strategies for the 

preference to restructuring, downsizing or simply replacing government workers with non-government 
service providers. A greater emphasis will be placed on effective change management, which together 
with workforce planning, career planning and skills development will ensure that the government 
workforce has the flexibility and mobility to meet future needs. 
Further, the Government undertakes that permanent government employees will not be forced into 
unemployment as a result of organisational change or changes in agency priorities other than in 
exceptional circumstances. Where changes to employment arrangements are necessary, there will be 
active pursuit of retraining and deployment opportunities, and involuntary redundancy will only occur in 
exceptional circumstances, and only with the approval of the Commission Chief Executive, Public 
Service Commission. 
2. Application 
This policy applies to all permanent employees of Queensland Government agencies (including 
departments, public service offices, statutory authorities and other government entities as defined under 
the Public Service Act 2008). 
This policy does not apply to government employees who are subject to disciplinary action which would 
otherwise result in termination of employment, or who are not participating in reasonable opportunities 
for retraining, deployment or redeployment. 
3. Authority 
This policy was approved by Cabinet on 30 March 2015. 
4. Policy 
4.1 Permanent Employment 
The Queensland Government is committed to maximising permanent employment where possible. 
Casual or temporary forms of employment should only be utilised where permanent employment is not 
viable or appropriate. Agencies are encouraged to utilise workforce planning and management strategies 
to assist in determining the appropriate workforce mix for current and future needs. 
 
1 Employment security is a commitment to continuing employment in government, as distinct from job security. This distinction recognises 
that jobs may change from their current form, as the skills mix and composition of the government workforce vary to meet changing 
government and community service needs. 
===== page =====
 
4.2 Organisational change and restructuring 

limited in scale. All organisational change will need to demonstrate clear benefits and enhanced 
service delivery to the community. The objective is to stabilise government agencies, and to 
avoid unnecessary change that will not deliver demonstrable benefit to the Government or the 
community. 
Cabinet approval is required for all major organisational change and restructuring in agencies: 
(a) that will significantly impact on the government workforce (e.g. significant job 
reductions, deployment to new locations, alternative service delivery arrangements, 
etc). The emphasis will be on minimum disruption to the workforce and maximum 
placement of affected staff within agencies, and ordinarily organisational restructuring 
 
(b) that will have major social and economic implications, particularly in regional and rural 
centres where the government is committed to maintaining government employment. 
Proposals affecting these centres need to carefully evaluate the impact on communities 
to ensure that short-term efficiency gains are balanced against the long-term social and 
economic needs of these communities. 
The agency will need to demonstrate that any proposed organisational change or restructuring 
will result in clearly defined service enhancements to government and/or the community, as 
identified in a business case, and be undertaken through a planned process. Where an agency has 
made a decision to introduce major organisational change or restructuring, it will notify affected 
employees/unions and discuss the changes as early as practicable. This may be undertaken 
through forums such as Agency Consultative Committees. 
The requirement to obtain Cabinet approval for major organisational change is not intended to 
reduce the flexibility of Chief Executives in their day-to-
operations. Chief Executives retain prerogative over normal business activities to manage the 
government workforce, (such as job reclassification, job redesign, performance management, 
disciplinary action and transfers), and organisational improvement initiatives (such as process 
re-engineering, changes in work practices and the introduction of new technology). 
4.3 Employees affected by organisational change 
The government undertakes that tenured government employees will not be forced into 
unemployment as a result of organisational change, other than in exceptional circumstances. 
Government employees affected by performance improvement initiatives or organisational 
change will be offered maximum employment opportunities within the government, including 
retraining, deployment, and redeployment. Only after these avenues have been explored will 
voluntary early retirement be considered. 
Where continuing employment in the government is not possible, support, advice and assistance 
will be provided to facilitate transition to new employment opportunities. In the event of a 
decision to outsource a government service, the agency should ensure that every effort is directed 
towards assisting employees to take up employment with the external provider. Retrenchment 
will only be undertaken in exceptional circumstances where deployment or redeployment are not 
options, and only with the approval of the Commission Chief Executive, Public Service 
Commission. 
 
 
 
4.4 Consultation 
===== page =====
 
For further advice on the application of this policy, agencies should consult with the Office of 
Industrial Relations. 
===== page =====
 
APPENDIX 4: QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT POLICY ON THE CONTRACTING-OUT OF 
SERVICES 
1. Application 
The Queensland Government recognises that government agencies are the key instruments for delivering 
or implementing the policies of the government. 

on pursuing performance improvement strategies for its workforce, not on simply replacing government 
employees with non-government service providers. 
In this regard, the government has restored the following policy on contracting-out of services as part of 
2
its commitment to restoring fairness for the government workforce. This policy applies to all Queensland 
Government agencies (including departments, public service offices, statutory authorities, and other 
government entities as defined under the Public Service Act 2008) and all tenured employees of these 
agencies. The government recognises that, in the case of Queensland Health (comprising the Department 
of Health and the Hospital and Health Services), public health services are provided through a mix of in-
house delivered services and partnerships with non-government, community and private sector health 
providers. 
For the purposes of this policy, contracting-out refers to a contractual arrangement to deliver a service to 
government or the provision of a government service by a non-government service provider. Capital 
works programs are not considered government services for the purpose of this policy. This means that 
current arrangements for delivery of the capital works program through competitive tendering will 
continue. Further, the purchase of services by government agencies from an internal government provider 
is not regarded as contracting-out. 
Similarly, services contracted to community service providers through grant programs or as recurrently 
funded programs are not regarded as being contracted-out for the purposes of this policy. 
This policy does not apply to the normal purchase of inputs to government agencies such as office 
supplies and consultancies. It does however apply to contractual arrangements such as cleaning and other 
 
Where there are major joint ventures or co-locations with the private sector (e.g. hospital co-locations) 
decisions on the delivery of support services will be made on a case by case basis. 
2. Authority 
This policy was released on 16 January 2016. 
3. Policy 
3.1 Services currently provided in-house (i.e. by a government agency) 
It is the policy of the government that in order to maintain existing government jobs, there will be no 
contracting-out of services currently provided in-house other than in circumstances where: 
 actual shortages exist in appropriately skilled in-house staff; 
 there is a lack of available infrastructure capital or funds to meet the cost of providing new 
technology; or 
 
2 This policy should be read in conjunction with applicable industrial instruments. 
===== page =====
 
 it can clearly be demonstrated that it is in the public interest that services should be contracted-out. 
Cabinet approval will be required only for contracting-out proposals that meet the criteria outlined above 
where they would have a significant impact on the g
submissions proposing contracting-out initiatives should detail: 
 why the service cannot continue to be delivered by government agencies; 
 the impact on the government workforce; 
 how the proposed initiative will improve government service delivery; 
 any social and/or economic impact on the Queensland community; 
 the impact on regional and rural communities, where relevant, particularly in regard to 
maintenance of public employment in regional and rural Queensland; 
 the impact on future competitive tendering in a market where the government will have no 
capacity to bid; 
 communication and consultation strategies, including managing the impact on the tenured 
government workforce, and workforce transition plans for deployment, redeployment and 
retraining; and 
 the cost implications for government. 
Where the government agrees to contract-out services, employees and the relevant unions will be consulted 
as early as possible. Discussions will take place prior to any steps being taken to call tenders or to enter into 
any alternative bidding arrangement for the provision of services by an external provider. 
If, after full consultation with employees and relevant unions, employees are to be affected by the necessity 
to contract-out services, the government agency should: 
 ensure that effort is directed towards assisting employees to take up employment with the 
contractor; and/or 
 ensure that employees are given the maximum opportunity to accept deployment and 
redeployment. 
3.2 Services currently contracted-out 
It is the policy of the government that when existing contracts with non-government providers are due 
for renewal, the services generally will be once again offered to contract. 
If the conditions of the existing contract allow for the contract to be renewed without a tendering 
process, and the external provider has met all the conditions of the contract, a new contract may be 
offered to the current provider subject to continuing commercial viability and the mutual agreement of 
both parties. 
Where a contract is due to expire and a tendering process is proposed, government agencies may bid for 
the work, subject to any legislative requirements and government agencies competing on a fair basis  
that is, with any advantages or disadvantages that stem solely from their public ownership being 
removed or accounted for in an appropriate manner. Operational guidelines will be developed to assist 
agencies in assessing the relative merits of in-house and external bids. 
===== page =====
 
In-sourcing will be undertaken only where it can be demonstrated that work is competitive on 
an overall "best value" basis, including quality and cost of purchase and maintenance of any 
capital equipment required to perform the work. 
3.3 New services 
A decision on whether it is appropriate to contract-out new government services with significant 
workforce impacts will be made on a case by case basis by Cabinet. Opportunity will be provided 
for the new government service to be delivered by in-house staff where it can be demonstrated 
that work is competitive on an overall "best value" basis, including quality and cost of purchase 
and maintenance of any capital equipment required to perform the work. 
Cabinet submissions proposing contracting-out of new services should detail: 
 any social and/or economic impact on the Queensland community; 
 the impact on regional and rural communities; 
 the impact on future competitive tendering in a market where the government will have 
no capacity to bid; 
 why the service needs to be delivered by a non-government service provider; and 
 the cost implications for government. 
3.4 Services in replacement facilities 
Existing outsourcing arrangements may not always be extended to replacement facilities (e.g. 
replacement hospitals and schools). A decision by Cabinet on whether it is appropriate to 
continue to contract-out services in replacement facilities will be made on a case by case basis. 
Where a decision is made to transfer the existing contract to a replacement service, this may be 
offered 
to the current provider subject to commercial viability and the mutual agreement of both 
parties. 
Opportunity should be given for in-house staff to undertake the work where it can be 
demonstrated that work is competitive on an overall "best value" basis, including quality and 
cost of purchase and maintenance of any capital equipment required to perform the work. 
Cabinet submissions proposing contracting-out of replacement services should detail: 
 the impact on the government workforce; 
 how the proposed initiative will result in improvements to government service 
delivery; 
 any social and/or economic impact on the Queensland community; 
 the impact on regional and rural communities, where relevant, particularly in regard to 
maintenance of public employment in regional and rural Queensland; 
 the impact on future competitive tendering in a market where the government will have 
no capacity to bid, if relevant; and 
 the cost implications for government. 
3.5 Implementing the Policy on the Contracting-Out of Services 
In applying this policy, the following principles should be adhered to: 
===== page =====
 
i. The primary focus should be on improving the productivity of the existing government 
workforce through performance improvement strategies (such as training, innovation, and 
benchmarking); 
ii. Where services currently contracted-out come up for tender, or the delivery of new services and 
services in replacement facilities are being considered, in-house staff should be given the 
opportunity to undertake the work where it can be demonstrated that it is competitive on an 
overall "best value" basis, including quality and cost of purchase and cost of maintenance of any 
necessary capital equipment; 
iii. Where competitive tenders involve in-house bids, those bids must be fairly based  that is, with 
any advantages or disadvantages that stem solely from their public ownership being removed or 
accounted for in an appropriate manner; 
iv. Except in exceptional circumstances, in-house work units should be afforded sufficient opportunity 
and support, over a reasonable time, to achieve an acceptable level of performance, efficiency and 
effectiveness, before alternative service provision options are considered; and 
v. Options for the management of employees affected by organisational change are to include 
deployment, retraining, redeployment and voluntary early retirement. 
===== page =====
 
APPENDIX 5: QUEENSLAND GOVERNMENT COMMITMENT TO UNION ENCOURAGEMENT  
 
The Queensland Government has made a commitment to encourage union membership among its employees.  
 
As part of this commitment the government will: 
 Acknowledge union delegates and job representatives have a role to play within a workplace, 
including during the agreement making process. The existence of accredited union delegates 
and/or job representatives is to be encouraged. Accredited union delegates and/or job 
representatives shall not be unnecessarily hindered in the reasonable and responsible 
performance of their duties. 
 Subject to relevant legislation, allow employees full access to union delegates/officials during 
working hours to discuss any employment matter or seek union advice, provided that service 
delivery is not disrupted and work requirements are not unduly affected. Delegates will be 
provided reasonable access to facilities for the purpose of undertaking union activities. 
 Encourage the establishment of joint union and employer consultative committees at a central 
and agency level. 
 Promote reasonable and constructive industrial relations education leave in the form of paid time 
off to acquire knowledge and competencies in industrial relations. 
 Provide an application for union membership and information on the relevant union(s) to all 
employees at the point of engagement and during induction. 
 At the point of engagement, provide employees with a document indicating that the Agency 
encourages employees to join and maintain financial membership of an organisation of 
employees that has the right to represent their industrial interests. 
 Subject to relevant privacy considerations, provide union(s) with details of new employees. 
The active cooperation of all managers and supervisors is necessary to ensure that the government can honour this 
commitment. 
Passive acceptance by agencies of mem
commitment. Encouragement requires agencies to take a positive, supportive role, although ultimately it remains 
the responsibility of the unions themselves to conduct membership recruitment.
===== page =====
 
 
SIGNATORIES 
 
 
Signed for and on behalf of the Department of Youth Justice, Employment, Small Business and Training  
 
 
 
Robert Gee 
Director-General 
Department of Youth Justice, Employment, Small Business and Training 
Date:  20 November 2023     
 
In the presence of: Katie Jack 
 
 
Signed for and on behalf of The  Queensland  
 
 
 
Stacey Schinnerl 
Secretary 
Date:  20 November 2023     
 
In the presence of: Vinal Sharma 
 
 
 
Signed for and on behalf of Signed for and on behalf of Together Queensland, Industrial Union of Employees 
 
 
 
Alex Scott 
Secretary 
Together Queensland, Industrial Union of Employees 
Date:  17 November 2023     
 
In the presence of: Dee Spink 
 
 
 
Signed for and on behalf of 
Employees, Queensland 
 
 
 
Sharron Caddie 
President 
 
Date:  17 November 2023     
 
In the presence of: Jacqueline Lowe 
 
